
User Name: = 
Date and Time: = 2024-11-21
Job Number: = 239221323

Documents (200)
Client/Matter: -None-
Search Terms: drug recall
Search Type: NaturalAnd
Content Type
Narrowed by
news
Timeline: 01 Jan, 1980 to 31 Dec, 1989 Industry: Pharmaceuticals & Biotechnology 

1. Drug firm recalls arthritis drug

2. Company Recalls Six Drugs

3. Drug recalled in generic drug scandal

4. TOO DRUNK TO RECALL DRUG BUY NORTHSIDE COURTS

5. Manufacturer Recalls Arthritis Drug

6. Malaria drug recalled

7. Du Pont recalls anticoagulant drug ''Coumadin''

8. Company Recalls Cholesterol-Lowering Drug

9. Company Recalls Cholesterol-Lowering Drug

10. Bolar Begins Drug Recall

11. 3 Drugs Recalled Over Poison

12. EPILEPSY DRUG RECALLED

13. Health group urges heart drug recall

14. Generic scandal prompts another drug recall

15. Blood Pressure Drug Voluntarily Recalled

16. Company Agrees to Recall a Second Generic Drug

17. LYPHOMED LAUNCHES GENERIC DRUG RECALL

18. Newspaper Says Warning Failed To Get Drug Recalled

19. Malaria Drug Recalled; Wrong Medicine in Bottle

20. Drug Recalled in AIDS Scare

21. Drug Company Recalls 10 Products

22. FDA Recalls Brand of Heart Drug Quinidine Glutonate

23. FDA Recalls Brand of Heart Drug Quinidine Glutonate

24. Watchdog Groups Seek Recall of Painkilling Drug

25. Consumer Group Asks Recall of Older Drug Lots

26. Drug recall may cost Johnson $20m

27. TRACES OF POISON LEAD TO RECALL OF THREE DRUGS

28. Drug Maker Recalls 7 Products

29. Company Recalls Mislabled Heart Drug Sold to Veterans Administration

30. Possible Life Threat Cited in Recall of Heart Drug

31. Company Recalls Mislabled Heart Drug Sold to Veterans Administration

32. BLEEDING FACTOR RECALLED, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION REPORTS

33. Company Recalls High Blood Pressure Drug, Maxide

34. Drug Company Recalls Urinary Tract Medicine

35. Drug Recalled Because of Misrepresented Samples

36. Founder of AIDS Drug Recalls Early Research

37. Drug company recalls antibiotic capsules

38. FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION RECALLS COLD MEDICINE

39. Commons may have to be recalled to pass drug patent bill, PM says

40. FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION ANNOUNCES RECALL

41. Drug Manufacturer Recalls Cold Syrups, Citing Health Risks

42. BARNES RECALLS VOTES BY A DRUG 'COUNCIL' TO MURDER INFORMERS

43. FDA Says Heart, Blood Pressure Drug Is Recalled After Mislabeling

44. Drug Firm Agrees to Recall Cattle Implants

45. Retired General Recalls Frustration at Watching Drug Runners at Work

46. FDA orders drug firm to recall press release about medicine

47. Bush Anti-Drug Proposals Recall Rocky's New York War

48. URGENT RECALL OF DRUGS

49. COMPANY NEWS; Par Recalls Drugs Pending Inquiry

50. DRUG RECALL FOR DIABETICS

51. Drug Recall Is Announced

52. WIRE CAUSES DRUG RECALL

53. DRUG BATCH RECALLED

54. GENERIC ANTICONVULSANT RECALLED BY DRUG COMPANY FOR INEFFECTIVENESS

55. FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION TODAY RECALLED ACIDOPHILUS CAPSULES WHICH MAY BE MIXED WITH DANGEROUS S

56. Hoechst Drugs Recalled

57. REAGAN RECALLS OFFICIALS FOR DRUG ABUSE BRIEFINGS

58. Drug recall: steel wire in capsules

59. Cholesterol drug recalled by Bristol-Myers

60. COMPANY NEWS; U.S. Inspection Leads to Lilly Recall

61. FAULTY RECORDS AT LILLY PROMPT DRUG RECALL

62. U.S. Announces Recall Of Defective Heart Drug

63. GENERIC ANTICONVULSANT RECALLED BY FDA FOR INEFFECTIVENESS

64. DRUG FIRM RECALLING GENERIC ANTIBIOTIC

65. Johnson and Johnson hit by drug recall

66. Heart drug recalled urgently over fault

67. LAXATIVE WITHDRAWN BY FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION

68. American Home shuts generic plant

69. Disputed Antibiotic Recalled

70. NIPPON CHEMIPHAR UNDER HEAVY SELLING PRESSURE IN EARLY TSE TRADING

71. LILLY RECALLS 10 PRODUCTS

72. HEALTH: PRODUCT SAFETY; Mislabeled Poison Prompts Criticism Of Government's Recall Procedure

73. FLORIDA HRS SECRETARY COLER REQUESTS REMOVAL OF L-TRYPTOPHAN FROM SHELVES OF FLORIDA RETAILERS

74. GENERIC DRUGS GENERALLY SAFE; NO CAUSE FOR FEAR, SAYS FDA

75. FDA Says Firm Has Sold Unapproved Drug

76. Cheating Scandal May Lead to Costlier Generics

77. FDA recalls laxative

78. Orphengesic, generic drug

79. Drug Firm Recalls 50 Million Epilepsy Tablets

80. THRIFT DRUG COMPANY ANNOUNCES RECALL

81. ZOMAX Returning To Drugstores 'Fairly Soon'

82. DOUBTS ON DRUG TESTS - BLEWETT

83. scientific progress to change u.s. life in decades

84. Widow of drug firm's founder recalls its depression start; 'We still have some of the same customers'

85. FDA Chief Says Agency Needs More Power to Punish Cheating on Drug Tests

86. FDA Chief Says Agency Needs More Power to Punish Cheating on Drug Tests

87. Critics attack supply of 'banned' drugs

88. Contac to make comeback

89. Feds Criticize Heart Pacemaker Recall

90. Feds Criticize Heart Pacemaker Recall

91. Infant formula rules issued

92. Potassium Chloride Recalled

93. Potassium Chloride Recalled

94. Company to Pull Acidic Heart Drug Off Market

95. Tampering suspect says reward too low

96. DRUG MAKERS ARE USING BAD HABITS

97. Reward Fund Reaches $900,000 for Tampering Information

98. Editors: Repeating earlier story FDA probes big brand-name drug firm

99. Maker Recalls 7 Products

100. FDA probes big brand-name drug firm

101. New drug approval procedures proposed

102. Faster drug approval planned

103. Faster drug approval planned

104. FDA Drafting Direct-to-Consumer Rx Ad Rules

105. Johnson mixed own steroid ''cocktail''

106. COMPUTERS CROSS-CHECKING USE OF MEDICINES

107. New Efforts to Treat the Headaches That Won't Go Away

108. 234,000 Bottles Being Recalled

109. Govt warns doctors over suspect drugs

110. TAINTED ANTICOAGULANT DRUG FOR TREATING CANCER RECALLED

111. Drug Manufacturer Pulls Pain-Reliever From Market

112. 33 DRUGS BANNED FOR NEW PATIENTS

113. Mellor says drug dealers may forfeit their assets to state / Home Office official on the profits of crime

114. VITAMIN SUPPLEMENT LINKED TO 12 DEATHS OF PREMATURE BABIES

115. LOOKING FOR WEAKEST LINK

116. PENNSYLVANIA MEDICAL SOCIETY CONVENES ITS HOUSE OF DELEGATES TODAY

117. Reagan: Ambassadors Will Relay Get-Tough Message to Foreigners

118. Reagan seeks diplomatic help in anti-drug crusade

119. Drug for treating AIDS-related infections recalled

120. State Trying to Shut Down 'Filthy' Pharmaceutical Plant

121. House Members Urge Diplomatic Efforts On Drugs

122. Johnson & Johnson Halts Sales of Painkiller, Citing Lagging Sales

123. Judge Rules Against Generic Drug Makers

124. DRUG LINKED TO INFANT DEATHS RESULTS IN FEDERAL INDICTMENT

125. Judge Rules Against Generic Drug Makers

126. Radioactive Polonium Leakage Found At Three More Plants

127. Caller Brags Reward 'Isn't Enough' In Tainted Capsule Case

128. LIFELINE

129. PEOPLE - CHEMICALS

130. Cold Medicine Recalled

131. U.S. Detects Radioactive Leaks at 3 More Plants

132. Maker: Product May Have Been Marketed Without Full Test But It's Safe

133. Maker: Product May Have Been Marketed Without Full Test But It's Safe

134. Pill amnesty promotes safe medicine use

135. SCHWAB 'S BECOMES PART OF THE HOLLYWOOD LEGEND

136. 3M Corp. Expands Its Halt To Use Of Static Devices After Radiation Leaks

137. 3M Expands Market Withdrawal Of Static Devices After Radiation Leaks

138. FDA Investigating Maker of Blood Pressure Drug

139. FDA Says Review of Generic Drugs Has Resulted in One Recall

140. Business and Health; Drug Exports: Gains Forecast

141. Judge Rules Against Generic Drug Maker

142. Judge Rules Against Generic Drug Maker

143. ZOMAX Returning To Drugstores In Matter Of Weeks

144. U.S. Charges Safety, Effectiveness of Drug Misrepresented

145. FDA Commissioner 'Shocked' at Bribes Tied to Drug Companies

146. Exec says Tylenol selling again

147. Radioactive Polonium Leakage Found At Three More Plants

148. Company Recalls Selenium Tablets

149. Drug Manufacturer Says it Falsified Tests to Seek FDA Approval

150. FDA Says Generic Drug Review Results in One Recall

151. FDA Says Generic Drug Review Results in One Recall

152. NEW YORK COMPANY EXAMINED BY F.D.A.

153. FDA Commissioner 'Shocked' at Bribes Tied to Drug Companies

154. RhoGAM batch didn't cause AIDS case, study finds

155. `Battered woman' acquitted by jury of federal heroin smuggling charges

156. NCAA rules Nunn ineligible Aztec cornerback tests positive for methamphetamine

157. Olympic winner 'gave advie on drug taking'

158. Pharmaceutical Company, Beset by Problems, Trying to Recover

159. Magistrate Grants Bond, But Wants To Know Money Source

160. Nader Group Denounces Heart Valve Recall as Inadequate

161. Lilly given U.S. go-ahead to sell pioneering insulin

162. Generic firm temporarily shut down

163. Generic firm temporarily shut down

164. Ninth Tainted Capsule Found, FDA Ready For False Alarms

165. SmithKline Recalls Poison-Tampered Capsules

166. Radio program brings O'Connor, Koch together

167. FDA Recalls Nursoy Brand Infant Formula

168. THE DOCTOR'S WORLD

169. Hoechst warns on 'cheap drugs'

170. FDA Recalls Nursoy Brand Infant Formula

171. Too Early To Blame E-Ferol For Babies' Deaths, Doctor Says

172. QUALITY OF ARTIFICIAL HEART VALVES IS ASSAILED

173. FDA Wants Immediate Reports on Bad Drug Reactions

174. OLYMPICS; Credibility Is in Question

175. FDA Investigating Drug Manufacturer Alleged to Have Falsified Tests

176. U.S. ACTION ON FOODS, DRUGS DIPS

177. F.D.A. TELLS COMPANY TO REVISE DRUG DESCRIPTION

178. New FDA rules may plug deadly loophole

179. EPA Cites Drinking Water as Possible Source of Household Radon

180. ANTI-DEPRESSANT RECALLED

181. Fake Birth Controls Traced from Spain , Guatemala

182. Aspirin linked to rare childhood disease

183. FDA Accused Of Botching Probes Of Drug-Diversion Schemes

184. Kraft Taking Apart Plant in Search for Bacteria

185. Vitamin Solution Linked to Infant Deaths

186. DRUG WITHDRAWN AFTER FIVE DEATHS

187. Antibiotics are recalled

188. SmithKline to buy up to 20 percent of its shares in '' Dutch Auction''

189. Drug feared tainted with AIDS virus Suspect RhoGam used on 75 women at Scripps hospital

190. Colombian envoy shot as warning papers say

191. Manufacturers are edging quietly toward ads for prescription drugs

192. THE NITRITE SYNDROME; by Jack D. Early

193. DOCTORS STRETCH RULES ON AIDS DRUG

194. Congressman Calls for Justice Investigation of Drug Maker

195. u.s. pharmacists try to prevent drug interactions

196. F.D.A. Chief Says Most Generics Meet Standards

197. Inhalers for Asthma Recalled

198. U.S. generic drug firms under the gun

199. Europe Worries it Will Catch Crack's Continental Drift

200. Some Analysts See Prices Rising, Others Don't




Drug firm recalls arthritis drug
United Press International
October 28, 1985, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1985 U.P.I.
Section: Financial
Length: 408 words
Dateline: MORRIS PLAINS, N.J.
Body




Warner-Lambert Co. Monday suspended worldwide sales of an arthritis drug linked to five deaths and scattered cases of severe skin reaction in Europe, a spokesman said.
The New Jersey-based pharmaceutical company said it is recalling Isoxicam, a non-steroidal drug designed to reduce the inflammation of joints due to arthritis.
The drug was introduced in Europe in 1983, but company spokesman Marshall Molloy said it has not been released in the United States. It has been under review by the federal Food and Drug Administration since 1982.
The company decided to voluntarily withdraw the anti-arthritis drug from the world market so it can be re-evaluated scientifically and medically, Malloy said. He said the drug already had been recalled in France.
Malloy said 13 cases of a rare but severe skin disorder called Lyelle's syndrome have been linked to Isoxicam. The syndrome, which causes inflammation and sometimes loss of the skin, caused four deaths in France and one in Italy.
''Our clinical research (before the drug was released) had not shown reactions of this severity,'' Malloy said. He said the company did 300 clinical tests involving 46,000 people before the drug was introduced in 1983.
Malloy said the drug has been prescribed about 6.5 million times for roughly 4 million patients. He said sales of Isoxicam in 1984 totalled more than $20 million and were projected to reach nearly $25 million for 1985.
The first death linked to Isoxicam occurred in August 1984 in France. The drug was also marketed in West Germany, Italy, Switzerland, Austria, Belgium, Pakistan, Thailand, the Phillipines, Malazia-Singapore, Peru, Chile, and parts of the Middle East and Central America.
''We continue to believe in both the safety and efficacy of Isoxicam,'' the chief executive officer of Warner-Lambert, Joseph Williams, said in a statement. ''But in the current climate, we recognize that the responsible and prudent thing to do is to subject the drug to increased scrutiny and to suspend the sales while that review is in progress.''
The suspension will allow ''sufficient time for the company to show various European Economic Community members that the data bases they are using are erroneous and incomplete, at least with respect to adverse reaction reports relating to competitive products that Isoxican is being compared to,'' Malloy said.
Warner-Lambert is a worldwide health and personal care products company with sales of about $3.2 billion.

 

End of Document


Company Recalls Six Drugs
The Associated Press
March 6, 1981, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1981 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Length: 425 words
Byline: By PAUL MOSES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEWARK, N.J.
Body




A New Jersey generic drug manufacturer is recalling six of its products for testing by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
Premo Pharmaceutical Laboratories, Inc. of South Hackensack also has agreed to drop lawsuits against the FDA charging it favored brand-name manufacturers over the smaller generic companies, Executive Assistant U.S. Attorney Charles Walsh said Thursday.
The settlement, reached last week before U.S. District Judge Frederick B. Lacey, closed a case in which the FDA asserted it had the right to test generic drugs before they were distributed.
Premo said its less expensive products were identical to drugs made by major companies on which patents had expired.
But the judge found differences in inactive ingredients and manufacturing processes were great enough to allow the FDA to test the products, a process which can take up to 10 years.
The varying inactive ingredients could cause the generic product to dissolve in the bloodstream at a different rate than the brand-name products, Lacey decided.
The government contended many doctors and patients believed the products were equivalent.
In the case of one drug, triamterene with hydrochlorothiazide, an error could possibly be fatal to the patient, the judge decided.
Lacey issued a preliminary injunction Feb. 3 barring the manufacture or sale of eight of Premo's drugs.
One of those drugs, betamethasone valerate cream, used for skin ailments, was not subject to the recall.
Premo's triamterene product also was not subject to recall, but Walsh said the FDA believed it was no longer on the marketplace.
"We didn't feel there was any out there," he said.
Premo argued in a separate suit that long delays by the FDA in testing new drug applications deprived the public of low-cost drugs. It asked the FDA be forced to decide new drug applications within 180 days.
But Premo dropped the suit under the settlement, although it may be filed again within a year.
The recalled drugs, with brand names and their manufacturers are: allopurinol tablets, marketed as Zyloprim by Burroughs Wellcome for treating gout symptoms; chlorthalidone tablets, marketed as Hygroton by USV Pharmaceuticals for treating edema; trifluoperazine hydrochloride tablets, marketed as Stelazine by Smith Kline & French for treating psychosis; doxylamine succinate and pyridoxine hydrochloride tablets, marketed as Bendectin by Merrell-National Laboratories for morning sickness; hydroxyzine pamoate capsules, or Vistaril, and hydroxyzine hydrochloride tablets, or Atarax, both by Pfizer Pharmaceuticals for tension.

 

End of Document


Drug recalled in generic drug scandal
United Press International
July 25, 1989, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1989 U.P.I.
Section: Washington News
Length: 361 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A pharmaceutical firm, recently convicted of bribing a Food and Drug Administration employee, has recalled a generic, high blood pressure drug after admitting to misleading government inspectors.
Par Pharmaceutical Inc., of Spring Valley, N.Y., in a statement released Monday, confessed to giving the FDA false safety data about its generic form of the drug Maxzide. Par said it will voluntarily pull the drug off the market.
''Certain product samples furnished to an FDA inspector were intentionally drawn from a production batch other than that represented to the inspector,'' the company's statement said. No explanation was offered for the switch.
FDA officials said Monday they have also found irregularities in testing data of two other drugs made by Par -- generic versions of the muscle relaxant Orphengesic Forte and the anti-convulsant Valproic Acid.
Earlier this month, Par pleaded guilty to bribing a chemist in the FDA's generic drug division. Two other FDA chemists and three other generic drug makers have also been charged in the bribery scandal, and the investigation is continuing.
In addition, Vitarine Pharmaceuticals Inc., of Springfield Gardens, N.Y., recently recalled its generic version of a high blood pressure drug after admitting the capsules it submitted for FDA approval were filled with another company's brand-name drug.
Generic drugs do not have brand names, but are chemically equivalent to brand-named drugs whose patents have expired. They generally are cheaper than brand-name products, and their wide market has sparked fierce competition among manufacturers seeking generic drug approval.
Par directors Monday announced they have started an internal review of the firm's research activities and record-keeping systems. The company remains the subject of investigations by federal prosecutors, the FDA and Congress.
''We can no longer be reasonably confident that the FDA is able to detect the entry of unsafe or inefficacious generic drugs into the nation's pharmacies,'' said Rep. John Dingell, D-Mich, chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee and leader of the congressional probe into corruption in the generic drug industry.

 

End of Document


TOO DRUNK TO RECALL DRUG BUY; NORTHSIDE COURTS
Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)
June 5, 1987 Friday
Late Edition

 Copyright 1987 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd All Rights Reserved
Section: NORTHERN HERALD; Pg. 4
Length: 275 words
Body




A Dee Why man was fined a total of $300 when he appeared at North Sydney Court this week charged with three drug offences.
Police arrested Donald Christopher Braden after finding he had cannabis resin and amphetamine in his possession at Mosman on May 21.
Braden, 29, welder, of Cassia Street, Dee Why, pleaded guilty to possessing the drugs and to using cannabis at Brookvale the same day.
The prosecutor, Sergeant Martin Shume, said police saw Braden and another man sitting on the steps of a shop at the intersection of Spit and Military Roads, Mosman, at about 11.45pm. Braden was holding a dark, solid substance wrapped in plastic and admitted it was "hash".
He was then searched and a piece of folded paper containing a white, powder substance was found in a pocket of his jacket. Asked what it was, Braden said: "It's speed. I bought it tonight at the Mosman Hotel. It's for my own use".
Later at Mosman police station he said he had not used the amphetamine but"smoked some of the hash at lunchtime at Brookvale".
Sergeant Shume said the cannabis resin weighed 9.5 grams and the amphetamine weighed 0.2 grams, including the paper wrapper.
Mrs Barbara Solomon, defending, said Braden was very drunk when arrested and did not remember very much about the incident.
"He admits smoking (cannabis) from time to time but does not use amphetamine at all," she said. "He can only assume that he purchased it because he was under the influence of alcohol."
Braden had a steady job and was well thought of by his employers.
The magistrate, Mr Ross Leader, fined him $120 for possessing the amphetamine, $100 for the possession of cannabis and $80 for using cannabis.
 Load-Date: July 20, 2007

 

End of Document


Manufacturer Recalls Arthritis Drug
The Associated Press
August 6, 1982, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1982 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 509 words
Byline: By BETTY ANNE WILLIAMS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The manufacturer of Oraflex, an arthritis drug whose sales have been halted worldwide because of safety concerns, says consumers returning their medication will be given refunds.
The Food and Drug Administration said Eli Lilly and Co. began recalling supplies of Oraflex on Thursday, a day after the Indianapolis-based pharmaceutical company suspended sales and distribution.
The once-a-day medication has been associated with 61 deaths in Britain and 11 in the United States, as well as a range of side effects.
Unused supplies of Oraflex were to be returned to: Eli Lilly and Co., 1202 South Dakota St., Building 80, Indianapolis, Ind., 46225.
The company planned to notify doctors and pharmacists by letter that the drug, which has the generic name benoxaprofen, shouldn't be used further for treating rheumatoid arthritis or osteoarthritis.
The chain of events leading to the recall began earlier in the week when Denmark limited use of the drug to hospitalized patients.
On Wednesday, the British Committee on Safety of Medicines, similiar to the FDA, ordered a 90-day suspension of Oraflex sales in Great Britain because of concern about its side effects.
Lilly officials conferred with FDA representatives later Wednesday and decided to suspend sales in the United States and in other countries where the drug had been sold _ South Africa, Spain, Germany, Taiwan and Denmark. The FDA approved that decision because of its confidence in the assessment made by British authorities.
FDA spokesman Edward Nida described the recall as a "natural followup" to Lilly's voluntary sales suspension.
Nida also said the pattern of liver and kidney failures among the people who died in Britain was not discernible in the United States. Most of the British deaths were among elderly people.
Oraflex is part of a class of drugs called non-steroidal, anti-inflammatory agents with which liver and kidney problems are associated. But Oraflex also is associated with photosensitivity and nail separation.
Oraflex had been on the U.S. market since May after winning clearance from the FDA in April. It had been sold in Great Britain as Opren for two years.
After early reports of serious adverse reactions among the elderly in Britain were publicized in May, the company sent advisories to physicians in June recommending that older people be started on a daily dose of half or two-thirds of the standard 600-milligram dosage.
FDA is reviewing adverse reaction data from the United States and Great Britain to make a long-term assessment of the drug.
Asked whether Oraflex patients should report their adverse reactions directly to the FDA, Nida said a better way would be to have it reported by the patient's doctor. "The physician's evaluation is really the most beneficial in terms of helping others," he said.
Oraflex had been the subject of a lawsuit seeking an immediate ban on its sale as an imminent health hazard. That suit was filed Monday by the Public Citizens Health Research Group, the American Public Health Association and the National Council of Senior Citizens.

 

End of Document


Malaria drug recalled
United Press International
December 1, 1989, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1989 U.P.I.
Section: Washington News
Length: 207 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Food and Drug Administration announced Friday that Biocraft Laboratories is voluntarily recalling a malaria drug -- Goldline chloroquine phosphate 250 milligram tablets.
 The FDA said bottles of 100 tablets of the drug -- from lot number 14311 and embossed with ''BL'' on one side of the tablet and ''54'' on the other side -- actually contain an animal diuretics or water pill.
''About 1,000 bottles of the product may still be on drug store shelves or dispensed to patients,'' the FDA said. ''Bottles containing the wrong drug have been found in California, Utah, Arizona and Oregon.''
 The correct marking for chloroquine phosphate tablets, made by the Elmwood Park., N.J., company, is ''BL'' on one side and ''38'' on the other side, the government agency said.
 The malaria pills are white. The water pills are off-white.
 ''If patients use the erroneously labeled diuretic tablets instead of the correct product, they would not be protected against or treated for malaria, which can be a life-threatening disease,'' the FDA said.
 ''Further, patients taking large doses of diuretics can suffer from electrolyte depletion, which might lead to irregular heartbeat, weakness or low blood pressure, the FDA said.
 No injuries have been reported.

 

End of Document


Du Pont recalls anticoagulant drug ''Coumadin''
United Press International
May 14, 1987, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1987 U.P.I.
Section: Domestic News
Length: 245 words
Dateline: WILMINGTON, Del.
Body




The Du Pont Co. issued a nationwide recall Thursday of 600,000 tablets of a prescription anticoagulant called ''Coumadin'' because some 7.5 milligram tables were oversize and could cause hemorrhaging.
The company urged consumers to return 7.5 milligram Coumadin tablets bought after March 19 to their pharmacy for examination and possible replacement.
Du Pont said lot number YO 244B of Coumadin may contain oversized tablets which may contain a significant overdose that could cause hemorrhaging.
''It's difficult to say what would happen (if someone took an oversized pill). There's a significant possibility there would be hemorrhaging, since the drug inhibits blood clotting,'' DuPont spokesman Roger Morris said.
Lot numbers are not normally written on patient containers of the drug, but are on the labels of bottles distributed to pharmacists.
Other tablet strengths are not affected by the recall and Morris said there have been no problems reported by people taking the 7.5 milligram tablets.
Morris said quality inspectors found 45 oversized tablets in a barrel of 100,000 tablets at the Du Pont plant. A check of five more barrels turned up no overzied tablets, but Du Pont issued a voluntary recall after discussions with the Food and Drug Administration.
The medication is taken by people with heart difficulties or problems with blood clots. ---
Du Pont said patients and pharmacists with questions about the recall can call 1-800-443-2261 between 8 a.m. and 4:30 p.m.

 

End of Document


Company Recalls Cholesterol-Lowering Drug
The Associated Press
May 17, 1988, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1988 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 202 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A pharmaceutical company is replacing potentially contaminated batches of a popular cholesterol-lowering drug, but a spokesman said Tuesday the action will not interrupt availability to patients taking the medication.
Bristol Laboratories is restocking pharmacists' and wholesalers' shelves with new supplies of Questran.
Company spokesman Rolland Eckels said an estimated 150,000 Americans take the drug each day, but that there was no way to estimate how many may need to have their prescriptions replaced.
The voluntary action by the company is listed by the Food and Drug Administration as a "Class II" recall, a category in which the risk of serious adverse health consequences is considered remote.
The recalled cans and packets bear an expiration date of between August 1988 and October 1991: from "USEBY 8 88" through "EXP 1 OCT 91," or have the following batch codes: MKH81, MKH82, MLH46, and MLH47.
Patients in doubt can check with their pharmacist to see whether they should get a free replacement.
The action was taken after the company learned that one of the ingredients in the drug _ supplied by an Italian manufacturer _ may have been contaminated by agricultural chemicals made by the same manufacturer.

 

End of Document


Company Recalls Cholesterol-Lowering Drug
The Associated Press
May 17, 1988, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1988 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 202 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A pharmaceutical company is replacing potentially contaminated batches of a popular cholesterol-lowering drug, but a spokesman said Tuesday the action will not interrupt availability to patients taking the medication.
Bristol Laboratories is restocking pharmacists' and wholesalers' shelves with new supplies of Questran.
Company spokesman Rolland Eckels said an estimated 150,000 Americans take the drug each day, but that there was no way to estimate how many may need to have their prescriptions replaced.
The voluntary action by the company is listed by the Food and Drug Administration as a "Class II" recall, a category in which the risk of serious adverse health consequences is considered remote.
The recalled cans and packets bear an expiration date of between August 1988 and October 1991: from "USEBY 8 88" through "EXP 1 OCT 91," or have the following batch codes: MKH81, MKH82, MLH46, and MLH47.
Patients in doubt can check with their pharmacist to see whether they should get a free replacement.
The action was taken after the company learned that one of the ingredients in the drug _ supplied by an Italian manufacturer _ may have been contaminated by agricultural chemicals made by the same manufacturer.

 

End of Document


Bolar Begins Drug Recall
The New York Times
October 9, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk
Length: 203 words
Byline: By The Associated Press
Body




The Bolar Pharmaceutical Company, a generic drug maker, yesterday voluntarily began the recall of a generic antibiotic used to treat urinary tract infections. The move came a day after the Food and Drug Administration requested the action.
The F.D.A. said Bolar, based in Copiague, L.I., cheated on product safety tests when it submitted the drug, nitrofurantoin, for approval.
Robert Shulman, president of the company, said in a statement that the recall of the 100-milligram capsules was in response to questions raised by the F.D.A.
''Bolar is concerned first with the ongoing well-being of the people who use our drugs,'' Mr. Shulman said. ''The charges that have been made against this product and our company warrant this cautious move on our part while we investigate to determine where the truth lies.''
An F.D.A. investigation found indications that Bolar had substituted the brand name drug Macrodantin for its generic version in tests three years ago to win approval of the generic product, said Jeff Nesbit, an F.D.A. spokesman.
''We believe that this occurrence is not of Bolar's doing,'' Mr. Shulman said, adding that the product tested by the F.D.A. was not the same product it provided for laboratory testing.

 

End of Document


3 Drugs Recalled Over Poison
Facts on File World News Digest
March 28, 1986

 Copyright 1986 Facts on File, Inc.
Section: U.S. AFFAIRS; Consumer Product Tampering
Length: 328 words
Body




SmithKline Beckman Corp. March 21 recalled three of its nonprescription capsule products after the discovery of traces of rat poison in about half a dozen capsules.
The safety of capsule drugs had surfaced as an issue after the recent poisoning death of a woman who had taken a capsule of Johnson & Johnson's Tylenol painkiller laced with cyanide. [See p. 115D3]
Two days before ordering the recall, SmithKline Beckman had received the first in a series of anonymous telephone threats warning of capsules laced with cyanide and rat poison. Police, federal authorities, newspapers and radio stations received similar calls over the next few days. The caller or callers did not mention money, but instead delivered rambling attacks upon the sale of capsule products.
Investigators from the federal Food and Drug Administration March 19 descended upon stores in Orlando, Fla. and Houston that had been named in the first call. They found eight capsules that had obviously been tampered with but at first discovered no foreign substances aside from corn starch and sugar.
Nevertheless, SmithKline Beckman March 20 asked stores to stop selling the three products that showed tampering. It advised customers not to use packages of the drugs bought since March 15.
The three products were Contac cold capsules, Teldrin allergy relief capsules and Dietac appetite suppressant capsules.
The company, apparently acting on its own, March 21 ordered the recall of the drugs after minute traces of the rat poison warfarin had been detected in tampered capsules. As of March 22, the poison had been found in six capsules of Contac, two of Teldrin and one of Dietac. Investigators said the amounts were too small to cause harm.
The products recalled by the Philadelphia-based company together had enjoyed sales of some $64 million during 1985, accounting for less than 2% of the company's $514.4 million in earnings for the year. SmithKline Beckman said it expected to reintroduce the products.

 

End of Document


EPILEPSY DRUG RECALLED
PR Newswire
September 21, 1988, Wednesday

 COPYRIGHT 1988 PR Newswire Association, Inc.
Length: 338 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 21
Body




WASHINGTON, Sept. 21 /PRN/ -- The Food and Drug
Administration today urged epilepsy patients to check with their
pharmacies to determine if the carbamazepine tablets they may have
are among the 50 million being voluntarily recalled by
Pharmaceutical Basis Inc., of Denver, as potentially less effective.
    The tablets are not harmful themselves but may not control or
prevent seizures as well as they should.
    FDA Commissioner Frank E. Young, M.D., Ph.D, said, "I would
advise patients to continue with their daily regimen of the tablet
-- which may be effective for most people -- until they can be
replaced."
  Patients will not be able to identify the recalled products for
themselves.  The 200-milligram tablets, some of which may be fully
effective, are round, white and marked on one side with one of three
designations -- 34/15, C66 or 832/G133.
    Pharmacies, however, can check with information supplied to them
by the manufacturer to determine if the tablets are among the recalled lots.  The products affected are sold under the
manufacturer's own name, as well as those of Rugby Laboratories
Inc., Mutual Pharmaceutical Co. Inc., Martec Pharmaceutical Inc.,
Best Generics Inc., h.l. Moore Drug Exchange, Major Pharmaceutical
Corp., Goldline Laboratories, Parmed Pharmaceuticals Inc., Bioline
Laboratories Inc., Schein Pharmaceutical Inc., Lederle Laboratories
Division of American Cyanamid Co., Genetco Inc., GlenLawn
Laboratories, Harber Pharmaceutical Co., Qualitest Products Inc.,
Interstate Drug Exchange Inc. and Texas Drug Reps Inc.
    The tablets are being recalled because they do not dissolve well
and thus may not enter the bloodstream as expected.  FDA has
received 15 reports of problems, including some unexpected seizures,
which may be related to this manufacturing problem.
    There are alternative manufacturing sources as well as
sufficient supplies from Pharmaceutical Basics Inc. to replace the
carbamazepine being recalled.
CONTACT -- Mike Shaffer of the Food and Drug Administration,
301-443-3285 or, after hours, 301-831-9364

 

End of Document


Health group urges heart drug recall
United Press International
January 20, 1983, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1983 U.P.I.
Section: Washington News
Length: 364 words
Byline: By THOMAS FERRARO
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A Ralph Nader-founded consumer group urged the government Thursday to order a recall a drug that a medical journal recently reported might contribute to the death of heart patients.
The Public Citizens Health Research Group also called on the Food and Drug Administration to warn doctors not to use the product because of its ''potentially lethal qualities'' and ''to consider action'' against the manufacturer, Abbott Laboratories.
In a letter to FDA Commissioner Arthur Hayes, the group said Abbott first learned of the possible problem with older batches of its epinephrine in June 1982, but apparently failed to immediately warn doctors or notify the FDA.
''I urge you to order an immediate recall of a thousand or more of Abbott Laboratories' ten milliliter syringes with intra-cardia needles, containing epinephrine hyrdo-chloride with lot number 44-145-DK or lower,'' Dr. Sidney Wolfe, executive director of the health research group, wrote.
In repsonse to a report in The American Journal on Medicine, the FDA urged physicians Monday to exercise caution in use of older lots of the drug, often used to restart hearts after cardiac arrest.
The agency said it was reviewing the findings of the study in the Journal, but said it had received no reports of deaths associated with the drug.
In the article, two doctors reported on two cases in which the blood of patients was abnormally acidic after use of lots of Abbott's epineprhine that were made before July 1982.
The acidity ''may itself contribute to the cause of death in some patients who potentially could be resuscitated,'' the doctors wrote.
Abbott, headquartered in North Chicago, Ill., said the two patients mentioned in the article received dosages two to six times the amount indicated on the package insert.
The company also said its experts, as well as outside experts, reviewed an early draft of the Journal report and found no relationship between the drug and the high acidic level in the two patients.
The company said, however, the product was changes last July to reduce the acidity level.
An FDA spokesman had no comment on the letter and also noted the drug, even before reformulation, met federal acidity standards.

 

End of Document


Generic scandal prompts another drug recall
United Press International
October 27, 1989, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1989 U.P.I.
Section: Financial
Length: 362 words
Byline: By REBECCA KOLBERG, UPI Science Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A New York generic drug firm recalled an antibiotic Friday due to allegations it passed off a brand-name formula as its own to win government approval.
The Food and Drug Administration said Bolar Pharmaceuticals of Copiague, N.Y., now has agreed to pull its version of nitrofurantoin macrocrystalline capsules off the market.
The drug, which is used to treat urinary tract infections, had previously been recalled from wholesalers, but the new action -- which was initially resisted by Bolar -- extends down to the pharmacy level, the FDA said.
In announcing the recall, the FDA said, ''Although no health problems are known to be associated with the product, the FDA cannot assure that it is equivalent to its brand name counterpart.''
Generic drugs are supposed to be chemically equivalent to brand-name drugs whose patents have expired. Generally cheaper than brand-name products, generics account for up to one-third of the U.S. prescription drug market.
The FDA's generic drug division is currently confronting a scandal stemming from three FDA chemists' bribery convictions, and growing revelations of wrongdoing in the generic industry.
The FDA contends that Bolar substituted the brand-name version of nitrofurantoin, made by Norwich Eaton Pharmaceuticals of Norwich, N.Y., in place of its own to gain FDA approval. The agency said it will try to bar Bolar from making the product in the future.
Two months ago, the FDA ordered a recall and began taking steps to rescind Bolar's right to make a generic version of the high blood pressure drug Dyazide, saying it was not therapeutically equivalent to the brand-name product. That action came amidst relevations that the company allegedly switched drug samples submitted for approval tests.
Drug swapping schemes to fool government officials have also been uncovered for at least five drugs made by Vitarine Pharmaceuticals of Springfield Gardens, N.Y., the FDA said.
The FDA is currently testing the top 20 generic drug firms and the 20 largest selling generic drugs. Results of the investigations are scheduled to be presented to Congress next month. So far, at least 26 drugs have been recalled in the wake of the scandal.

 

End of Document


Blood Pressure Drug Voluntarily Recalled
The Associated Press
January 15, 1980, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1980 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 272 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Selacryn, a new drug prescribed for treatment of high blood pressure and fluid retention, is being voluntarily taken off the market after five persons taking it died, the manufacturer announced Tuesday.
Smith Kline & French said it had decided upon the recall in consultation with the Food and Drug Administration.
Both the Philadelphia-based company and the agency said there is insufficient evidence so far to determine what role the drug played in the deaths.
"While we are still investigating, we cannot site with specific knowledge any case where Selacryn was definitively the cause of death," said company spokesman Jeremy Heymsfeld from Philadelphia.
Persons taking the drug are being advised to consult with their doctors before discontinuing it. Other drug treatments are available.
The company has agreed to notify every physician and pharmacist of its recall. The drug has been available since last May.
In that time, there have been reports of 52 cases of liver damage, including 32 cases of jaundice, among about 300,000 persons taking the drug, the FDA said.
"Among the 52 cases, there were five deaths. It is not yet possible to say whether the deaths resulted from the drug in every case or from other possible causes, such as viral hepatitis or acute alcoholism," the FDA said.
The drug is prescribed for patients suffering from high blood pressure and fluid retention, especially in cases of gout.
The recall covers supplies of Selacryn in wholesale, hospital and retail pharmacies. Pharmacists are being asked to discontinue sale of the drug.
The company would not release names or places of residence for the people who died.

 

End of Document


Company Agrees to Recall a Second Generic Drug
The Associated Press
July 26, 1989, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 255 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A New York pharmaceutical company said Wednesday it will recall a second generic drug because the firm may have misrepresented a sample of the product to a Food and Drug Administration inspector.
Par Pharmaceutical Inc. of Spring Valley, N.Y., has agreed with an FDA request to recall its generic versions of Orphengesic, a muscle relaxant, and Orphengesic Forte, the same drug in an extra-strength formulation, said Barbara Manners, a Par vice president and general counsel.
On Monday, Par said it was voluntarily recalling its generic version of the high-blood-pressure drug Maxzide. The company said an internal investigation found that product samples given to an FDA inspector were "intentionally drawn from a production batch other than that represented to the inspector."
In the case of generic Orphengesic and Orphengesic Forte, the company "may have misrepresented" to the inspector the size of the production batch from which the sample was taken, Manners said.
"Given the fact that it's not clear (whether the batch was misrepresented), it has to be recalled," Manners said.
She said the company sees "no immeditate health or safety problems" with either the generic Orphengesic drugs and the generic Maxzide.
Par pleaded guilty last week in U.S. District Court in Baltimore to paying illegal gratuities to FDA employees. The charges were unrelated to the circumstances that led to the product recalls, Manners said.
Generic drugs are lower cost but chemically equivalent versions of brand-name drugs whose patents have expired.

 

End of Document


LYPHOMED LAUNCHES GENERIC DRUG RECALL
Journal of Commerce

 Copyright 1988 The Journal of Commerce, Inc.
Section: CHEM, Pg. 9B
Length: 302 words
Byline: KENNETH REID; Journal of Commerce Special
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




LyphoMed Inc. of Chicago is recalling about 20,000 vials of the generic drug amphotericin B - which is used to treat life-threatening fungal diseases that often plague AIDS victims - after some patients developed adverse reactions to the product, according to the company and the Food & Drug Administration.
 Facing an FDA investigation for violations of agency quality control regulations, LyphoMed voluntarily began the recall last week after the agency learned of adverse reactions, some in AIDS victims who took the drug.
LyphoMed resident John Kapoor said reactions were one in 4,000 uses.
Some 20,000 vials of the drug, administered intravenously, are subject to recall, he said. Mr. Kapoor said the recall was triggered by an FDA inspection of LyphoMed's supplier of amphotericin B, which turned up manufacturing problems. He declined to reveal the company name or discuss details, but said the drug was first marketed last summer.
FDA sources, however, said the agency is primarily concerned that LyphoMed produced amphotericin B in one of two Chicago-area plants under scrutiny for sterility problems. FDA has refused to approve LyphoMed's applications to make additional drugs in the plant until it shapes up.
LyphoMed is one of the fastest growing makers of generic , sterile injectable drugs, which are sold to pharmacies in lyophilized powders. Its 1988 sales are projected to be $ 220 million, with $ 30 million in profits, a $ 1-a-share return, according to an Alex. Brown & Sons analysis. Thirty percent of LyphoMed is owned by Fujizawa Inc. of Japan.
The firm also has recalled 55,670 vials of methotrexate sodium, with and without preservatives, leucovorin calcium and fluorouracil injection, according to FDA. The amphotericin B recall is expected to aid sales of Squibb Inc.'s brand name Fungizone.
 Load-Date: January 7, 1997

 

End of Document


Newspaper Says Warning Failed To Get Drug Recalled
The Associated Press
January 18, 1983, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1983 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 286 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Abbott Laboratories failed to recall a drug used for emergency treatment of heart failure despite a warning that the drug was so acidic it could be fatal to many patients, the Daily News reported today.
Within weeks of receiving the warning last June, Abbott reformulated the product to reduce acidity levels but did not recall supplies of the old formulation and did not warn physicians of the dangers of the old formulation, the newspaper quoted a spokesman for Abbott as saying.
The drug is Abbott's preparation of epinephrine, better known as adrenaline, often injected to restore a heartbeat. Acidity is usually increased by the shutoff of oxygen that occurs when the heart stops.
The News quoted the Abbott spokesman, Barry Cohen, as saying the drug was not recalled because the company's medical experts believe it is safe when used in recommended dosages. He said it was reformulated because of the "possibility that overdosing might occur in clinical practice."
The newspaper said the Food and Drug Administration is looking into the matter, and in the meantime has warned doctors against using the older version of the drug.
Dr. Joseph Feldschuh of New York Medical College-Metropolitan Hospital Center said he and Dr. Raymond Gambino of Columbia University sent Abbott the warning last June.
Feldschuh said he began his investigation after a patient with normal blood acid levels died of heart failure with severe acidemia.
Feldschuh said that after "well over 1,000 tests of blood and chemistry to verify the acidity content" in the first patient as well as a second who died in a similar manner, he found the Abbott's epinephrine was eight times more acidic than a similar product made by Bristol Laboratories.

 

End of Document


Malaria Drug Recalled; Wrong Medicine in Bottle
The Associated Press
December 1, 1989, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 263 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A New Jersey company is recalling a malaria drug because some of the bottles contain an animal diuretic instead, the Food and Drug Administration said Friday.
The recall by Biocraft Laboratories of Elmwood, N.J., applies to Goldline brand 250 milligram chloroquine phosphate tablets packaged in 100-tablet bottles labeled as lot number 14311, the FDA said.
The FDA said the recall began after a pharmacist found a chloroquine phosphate bottle containing the animal diuretic, a drug that steps up production of urine. But no injuries or deaths have been reported.
Bottles containing the wrong drug have been found in California, Utah, Arizona and Oregon.
Using tablets from the erroneously labeled bottles would not protect against or treat malaria, which can be life-threatening, and large amounts of diuretics can lead to irregular heartbeat, low blood pressure and general weakness, the agency said.
The chloroquine phosphate tablets are round and white embossed with the code "BL" on one side of the tablet and "38" on the other side, the FDA said.
The tablets of forosemide, an animal diuretic, are oval, off-white and embossed with the code "BL" on one side and "54" on the other side.
The FDA said anyone who has a bottle or prescription of the recalled tablets should return the bottle to the pharmacy and consult a physician.
The agency is also asking pharmacists that may have received the recalled product to search their prescription files and notify patients immediately.
The FDA said 1,000 bottles of the product may still be on pharmacy shelves or in home medicine cabinets.

 

End of Document


Drug Recalled in AIDS Scare
The New York Times
December 11, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

 Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section D; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 202 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Dec. 10
Body




Armour Pharmaceutical is recalling 208 lots of a blood clotting agent distributed for hemophilia patients because of the possibility it could contain the AIDS virus, the Food and Drug Administration said today.
The announcement said the company, based in Bluebell, Pa., estimated that 2,000 to 5,000 doses of the clotting agent, H. T. Factorate, were on the market in the United States.
The recall is being undertaken as a precaution after six patients in Canada who were taking doses from three separate lots, processed using the same heat purifying method, had tested positive for the AIDS virus.
It is not known whether H. T. Factorate caused the Canadian patients to test positive, but the Canadian Government withdrew the three lots.
Commissioner Frank Young of the drug agency said that although all six positive AIDS tests had occurred in patients taking the factor from lots distributed only in Canada, United States lots processed similarly were being withdrawn ''as an extra precaution.''
The company no longer uses the heat treatment used to process the recalled lots, and not all of its H. T. Factorate is being withdrawn.
Acquired immune deficiency syndrome is passed by body fluids, including blood products.

 

End of Document


Drug Company Recalls 10 Products
The Associated Press
September 13, 1989, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 271 words
Dateline: INDIANAPOLIS
Body




Eli Lilly & Co. says it has recalled batches of 10 prescription drugs and halted distribution from its plant here because of record-keeping violations found by federal inspectors.
The pharmaceutical maker said it is confident there was nothing wrong with the safety or effectiveness of the drugs, which were recalled Tuesday from wholesalers and had never reached pharmacies.
An inpection by the Food and Drug Administration last month found objectionable conditions in nearly every area of Lilly's Indianapolis capsule and tablet plant, including failure to have written standard operating procedures for many tasks and record-keeping problems.
"In nearly every system examined, the available data were found to be incomplete or inaccurately summarized," the FDA said. Results of that inspection were made public Tuesday.
In response, Lilly voluntarily recalled 18 batches of drugs and halted distribution of all products from the plant, which manufactures a relatively small amount of the company's capsules and tablets, said spokesman Ed West.
Distribution will resume when revised procedures have been established, probably within weeks, West said.
He said the recall and distribution shutdown would not affect availability of any major products, and the cost to the company was negligible.
Among the medicines recalled were Darvon, a pain reliever; Tapazole, a thyroid medication; Aventyl, an antidepressant, and Nalfon, an anti-inflammation drug.
Acting Director Felix Schneider of the FDA's Midwest office in Detroit said the agency is looking at other Lilly operations and will make similar inspections of other drug companies.

 

End of Document


FDA Recalls Brand of Heart Drug Quinidine Glutonate
The Associated Press
December 24, 1980, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1980 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 281 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Food and Drug Administration on Wednesday announced the recall of a heart drug, a generic version of quinidine glutonate, saying the tablet is dangerously under strength because it fails to deliver enough of its medicine to the bloodstream.
The defective product is made by Bolar Co. and sold under the Bolar name and under 10 private labels, an FDA spokesman said.
Agency officials said use of the Bolar product could be fatal in situations where a full dose is needed to prevent irregularities in the rhythm of the heart.
The officials say those who have the drug should continue to use it but should immediately contact their doctor to be switched to another product.
According to the spokesman, the Bolar product can be distinguished from FDA-approved products because the recalled tablet is an unmarked, plain white tablet, half an inch in diameter. The approved products are Qinatulte Dura-Tabs, made by Berlex Laboratories, a white pill with a chemical flask and a C printed on one side and the hands of a clock on the other, and Duraquin, made by Parke Davis Co., an off-white tablet with P-850 printed on one side.
Bolar, located in Coppaigue, N.Y., is cooperating in the recall by contacting its 68 distributors and through them the pharmacies that may have the product, the FDA spokesman said.
Bolar's product is sold under the Bolar label and the private labels Rugby, Bioline, Murray, H.L. Moore, Interstate Drug Exchange, Gramercy, Spencer-Mead, United Research Laboratories, Three P Products and the Goldline Brand of the Generix Drug Corp.
Closely related heart drugs -- quinidine sulphate and quinidine polyglacturonate -- are not involved in this problem, the spokesman said.

 

End of Document


FDA Recalls Brand of Heart Drug Quinidine Glutonate
The Associated Press
December 24, 1980, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1980 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 281 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Food and Drug Administration on Wednesday announced the recall of a heart drug, a generic version of quinidine glutonate, saying the tablet is dangerously under strength because it fails to deliver enough of its medicine to the bloodstream.
The defective product is made by Bolar Co. and sold under the Bolar name and under 10 private labels, an FDA spokesman said.
Agency officials said use of the Bolar product could be fatal in situations where a full dose is needed to prevent irregularities in the rhythm of the heart.
The officials say those who have the drug should continue to use it but should immediately contact their doctor to be switched to another product.
According to the spokesman, the Bolar product can be distinguished from FDA-approved products because the recalled tablet is an unmarked, plain white tablet, half an inch in diameter. The approved products are Qinatulte Dura-Tabs, made by Berlex Laboratories, a white pill with a chemical flask and a C printed on one side and the hands of a clock on the other, and Duraquin, made by Parke Davis Co., an off-white tablet with P-850 printed on one side.
Bolar, located in Coppaigue, N.Y., is cooperating in the recall by contacting its 68 distributors and through them the pharmacies that may have the product, the FDA spokesman said.
Bolar's product is sold under the Bolar label and the private labels Rugby, Bioline, Murray, H.L. Moore, Interstate Drug Exchange, Gramercy, Spencer-Mead, United Research Laboratories, Three P Products and the Goldline Brand of the Generix Drug Corp.
Closely related heart drugs -- quinidine sulphate and quinidine polyglacturonate -- are not involved in this problem, the spokesman said.

 

End of Document


Watchdog Groups Seek Recall of Painkilling Drug
The Associated Press
September 25, 1986, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1986 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 600 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER CONNELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A medical watchdog group today asked the Food and Drug Administration to ban an arthritis and pain-killing drug that went on the market just nine months ago.
Dr. Sidney M. Wolfe, director of the Public Citizen Health Research Group, charged the drug Suprol, known generically as suprofen, "has caused more than 100 reported cases of kidney damage," according to reports the manufacturer, Johnson & Johnson's McNeil Pharmaceutical Division, has filed with the FDA.
Wolfe said more than 500,000 patients have been exposed to the drug since the FDA approved it last Dec. 24. It was one of a record 30 new drugs that the agency approved in 1985, including 16 in December alone.
In May, the FDA sent a drug bulletin to all U.S. physicians cautioning them to prescribe Suprol "only with caution." It cited 16 reports of back and flank pain and decreased kidney function among patients, all of whom recovered within a few days after quitting the prescription drug.
The FDA said then that such a reaction was puzzling because it had not been reported in Europe, where the drug was on the market for 2 1/2 years.
The FDA had no immediate response to Wolfe's accusations, made in a letter that Health Research Group was delivering this morning to the office of FDA Commissioner Frank Young.
"We just can't comment on something we haven't seen," said FDA spokesman Ed Nida.
Bob Kniffin, a spokesman for Johnson & Johnson in New Brunswick, N.J., said the company also had not seen Wolfe's letter, but when informed by a reporter of Wolfe's charges, Kniffin said the company denied its drug had caused kidney damage.
"There has been no kidney damage. Where there has been a change in kidney function, that has been reversible simply by halting use of the drug," Kniffen said in a telephone interview Wednesday night.
"We did indeed report to them (FDA) more than 100 cases of flank pain, and there is a difference between that and kidney damage," Kniffin added.
He said physicians have been informed of "the occasional side effects of flank pain in letters this year, and information supplied to them in person and in print has made clear appropriate cautions in prescribing the drug."Wolfe said three-quarters of the reported adverse reactions were in men, with a mean age in the mid-30s. Citing a full-page ad in the Sept. 19 American Medical News for the drug that depicts a young man, he charged, "McNeil is now vigorously promoting Suprol to the very group most likely to be injured by the drug."Kniffin responded that the ad "includes a prominent display of the advise to physicians about prescriptions." He added that no further advertising of the drug was planned this year.
Wolfe charged the FDA with gross negligence for approving it in the first place.
"Suprol has a remarkable structural and chemical similarity to Selacryn, a drug FDA forced off the market in 1980 because it caused liver damage … and kidney damage," Wolfe wrote. Selacryn was made by another company, SmithKline Corp.
Wolfe also demanded "an investigation to consider criminal charges against McNeil." He cited a June 25, 1985, memo about the drug by an FDA doctor, John Harter, in which Harter wrote that McNeil's application for the drug's approval "has been plagued from beginning to end with 'bad data.' Some of it was deliberate falsification.""We deny his charge that the data provided to the Food and Drug Administration for the approval of Suprol was in any way false or misleading," Kniffin said. "We know of no reason why removal of the drug from the market is appropriate so long as physicians have proper instructions on prescribing."

 

End of Document


Consumer Group Asks Recall of Older Drug Lots
The Associated Press
January 20, 1983, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1983 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 440 words
Byline: By BETTY ANNE WILLIAMS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A consumer group asked the government Thursday to immediately recall certain lots of an injectable drug used to restart hearts after cardiac arrest, claiming the compound may contribute to some deaths it is supposed to prevent.
The appeal to the Food and Drug Administration on the Abbott Laboratories drug epinephrine, used in emergency situations, came from Public Citizen's Health Research, a Ralph Nader-founded organization.
The FDA advised physicians and hospital pharmacists Friday to be cautious in using certain lots of the drug while reports that it is too acidic are investigated.
Dr. Sidney Wolfe, director of the consumer group, said the agency should issue an explicit warning against the use of certain older lots of epinephrine.
In a letter to FDA Commissioner Arthur Hull Hayes Jr., Wolfe urged the agency to consider taking action against Abbott Laboratories of North Chicago, Ill., for failing to promptly warn doctors about an acid problem he said it became aware of last June.
FDA spokesman William Grigg said the agency had not seen Wolfe's letter and stood by its earlier statement.
Company spokesman Barry Cohen said he also had not seen a copy of Wolfe's letter and could not respond to it directly, but that the company had found no merit in reports of such a problem.
At issue are 10 milliliter Abboject syringes with intracardiac needles containing epinephrine hydrochloride solution.
 Two physicians reported in the January issue of the American Journal of Medicine that in two cases, the blood of cardiac patients became abnormally acidic after using the product although epinephrine remained within the acceptable acid standards set by U.S. Pharmacopeia.
Excess acidity may contribute to the cause of death in cardiac-arrest patients who might otherwise be revived.
 In his letter, Wolfe urged that the acidity standard for such drugs be updated.
Cohen said, however, that Abbott Laboratories had reviewed data submitted by the two doctors and concluded: "There is no cause-and-effect relationship established in their article."
The manufacturer reformulated the product last July, after the two doctors described their cases, the FDA said.
The agency said lots bearing the code 44-145-DK or lower were made before the reformulation and should be used with caution. Its advisory suggested using lots number 44-146-DK or above, or alternative drugs.
Cohen said Abbott's reformulation "has nothing to do with their (the doctors') hypothesis."
He said epinephrine has been reformulated periodically during the nine years it has been marketed and that last July's action was taken to make the product comparable to competing drugs.

 

End of Document


Drug recall may cost Johnson $20m
Financial Times (London,England)
March 8, 1983, Tuesday

 Copyright 1983 The Financial Times Limited
Section: SECTION I; Pg. 18
Length: 366 words
Byline: BY OUR NEW YORK CORRESPONDENT
Body




JOHNSON & JOHNSON, the leading U.S. pharmaceutical group, expects that product returns and expenses resulting from the decision temporarily to withdraw worldwide distribution of its prescription drug, Zomax, will reduce after-tax earnings by about $20m this year.
This is the second heavy blow to the group's earnings arising from a largescale product recall in the space of just over five months.
In October, Johnson & Johnson recalled its big-selling Tylenol capsules from the U.S. market, after seven residents in the Chicago area died after taking capsules that had had been laced with cyanide.  At the time, Johnson & Johnson said the probable cost of the recall would be around $100m.
Zomax is a less important product, although it has still been an important revenue earner with worldwide sales in 1982 of $82m.  The group said yesterday that as well as the direct cost of the recall, the loss of sales revenue on the product would have an additional adverse impact on this year's earnings.
Johnson & Johnson earned wide-spread praise for its prompt reaction to the Tylenol tragedy.  The capsules were tampered with outside the group's manufacturing facilities, and with the help of an aggressive marketing programme the group has already gone a long way towards re-establishing the product's leading market position.
The Zomax case is quite different, in that the product has been linked with serious and in some cases fatal side effects.  The group's sales in 1982 amounted to $5.8bn, and its net income after tax came to $523.4m, before an extraordinary charge of $50m after tax stemming from the Tylenol withdrawal.
Johnson & Johnson's shares had been performing strongly in recent weeks, but this second blow to earnings has sent them sharply lower in the past few days.  They were trading in the early afternoon yesterday at $45 5/8, compared with $50 1/4 last Thursday.
Carla Rapoport writes from London: Ortho-Cliag, a Johnson & Johnson subsidiary in the UK, said yesterday that it had agreed with the UK Department of Health and Social Services to withdraw Zomax from the British market.  British sales are believed to be worth about £2m ($3m).

 

End of Document


TRACES OF POISON LEAD TO RECALL OF THREE DRUGS
The New York Times
March 22, 1986, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

 Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk
Length: 924 words
Byline: By PHILIP SHENON, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, March 21
Body




A leading drug company today ordered an immediate recall of capsules of Contac cold medicine and two other popular over-the-counter drugs after eight capsules were found with trace amounts of rat poison.
The manufacturer, the SmithKline Beckman Corporation, said investigators in Houston and Orlando, Fla., had found traces of warfarin, an anticoagulant used in rat poison, in capsules of Contac, the allergy remedy Teldrin and the appetite suppressant Dietac. The amount of poison was too small to harm humans, the company said.
 
Small Portion of Annual Sales
Analysts said the corporation would face minimal financial problems even if capsule sales had to be halted for a long time because the affected products represent less than 3 percent of the company's annual sales. [Page 8.] The recall came after anonymous callers to the company and news organizations warned that cyanide and rat poison had been placed in packages of capsules manufactured by SmithKline, the Philadelphia drug maker. The company stressed that no cyanide had been found.
Callers Called 'Terrorists'
At a news conference here, Dr. Frank E. Young, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, described the callers as ''terrorists'' who had demanded that all capsule products be removed from the marketplace.
''I liken this situation to the taking of hostages or the placement of a bomb on an aircraft,'' said Henry Wendt, SmithKline's president. ''I'm outraged at this situation.''
The company has said it is reconsidering the manufacture of capsule products, and today's developments seemed certain to put pressure on other drug companies to rethink capsule sales.
The recall came six weeks after a Westchester County woman died of cyanide placed in capsules of Extra-Strength Tylenol. Johnson & Johnson, the maker of Tylenol, stopped selling nonprescription capsules after the poisoning.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation had no comment on the tampering investigation. Two Federal law-enforcement officials who asked not to be identified said that arrests were not imminent in the case. One added that there was concern the tampering was an attempt to manipulate SmithKline stock. ''It's always a concern, although I know of nothing pointing in that direction right now,'' he said.
Tampering with a drug to cause injury is a Federal crime punishable by five years in prison and a $25,000 fine.
According to the Food and Drug Administration, the rat poison was discovered by investigators searching through packages of Contac and Teldrin sold in retail stores in the two cities. So far, Thomas M. Collins, a SmithKline vice president said, investigators have found five Contac capsules, two Teldrin capsules and one Dietac capsule with the poison.
The foreign material found in the capsules is made up of warfarin and two ingredients designed to attract rodents: sugar and cornstarch.
 
No Risk to Consumer
The amount of warfarin in the drugs would ''absolutely not do any harm -the consumer would not even have noticed it,'' said Dr. Young.
SmithKline officials and law-enforcement agencies agreed that the tampering of the packages had been crude and would have been easily noticed by most consumers.
They said the plastic blister packs containing the capsules were cut open, the poison was added to the capsules and then the capsules were returned to the packages. ''The current tampering was evidence, indicating that current packaging provides a measure of safety,'' Commissioner Young said.
The F.D.A. has said that the calls have come from at least one man and one woman who demanded that capsules be removed from the marketplace, saying that medicines sold in capsule form are unsafe.
SmithKline and several news organizations have reported receiving calls in which a man identified himself only as ''Gary'' and warned of tampering. A call to The New York Times on Wednesday warned of the tainted drugs and the caller said that he had not meant to single out SmithKline. According to law-enforcement officials, none of the calls demanded money from SmithKline.
The company said that telephone threats had also been made against another of its products, Sine-Off sinus capsules. No evidence of tampering with Sine-Off capsules has been found and the company does not plan to recall the drug.
 
Executive Talked to Caller
Mr. Collins of SmithKline said he took two of the calls. ''His conversation was all over the lot,'' Mr. Collins said of the caller. ''The gist of it is that he says the actions are being taken against these three products. His intent is to remove them from the market.''
The future of capsule products has been under intense discussion since 1982, when cyanide-laced capsules of Extra Strength Tylenol killed seven people in the Chicago area. The threat to SmithKline products will doubtless enlarge the debate within the pharmaceutical industry.
''It's been a brutal day for us,'' said John T. Walden, a spokesman for the Proprietary Association, a group of companies that make nonprescription drugs. He said that he knew of no drug makers that were planning to eliminate capsules because of this week's incident.
James B. Russo, a company spokesman, said that SmithKline would advise consumers of the recall procedure through a toll-free number: 1-800-543-3434. SmithKline said refunds could be requested from a subsidiary, Menley & James Labs, 100 Campus Road, Totowa, N.J. 07512.
The company's president, Mr. Wendt, told reporters at a news conference in Philadelphia that the company hoped to return Contac and the other drugs to the marketplace ''as soon as possible.''
 Graphic



 
Photo of containers of capsules being removed from a drugstore shelf in Houston (UPI)

 

End of Document


Drug Maker Recalls 7 Products
The Associated Press
October 21, 1989, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 239 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A small generic drug manufacturer in New York is recalling seven products because the company filed false information to win government approval for the drugs, according to the company and government officials.
Quantum Pharmics of Amityville, N.Y., last month suspended the production and distribution of all 21 of its generic drugs pending completion of an internal audit.
American Home Products Corp. of New York said the audit found that the seven drugs being recalled had been approved "on the basis of false information filed by the company's (Quantum's) prior management," the company said Friday.
American Home Products completed acquisition of Quantum in June 1988, said spokeswoman Carol Emerling.
The FDA said for some of the drugs, the company told the agency the size of the production batch submitted for testing to gain FDA approval was larger than it actually was. For other drugs, the FDA said it was concerned about data submitted in the original applications for approval.
The drugs being recalled are minoxidil tablets, chlorazepate dipotassium tablets, meclofenamate sodium capsules, trazadone, doxepin, diazepam and lorazapam.
Both the FDA and the company said there was no indication of any safety problem with any of the drugs.
Quantum is among more than 30 generic drug manufacturers being investigated by the FDA following disclosures of irregularities ranging from falsified records to misrepresentation of test data.

 

End of Document


Company Recalls Mislabled Heart Drug Sold to Veterans Administration
The Associated Press
September 26, 1987, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1987 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 376 words
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




A possibly mislabeled drug sold to the Veterans Administration has been recalled by its manufacturer, which warned that taking the wrong medication could endanger the lives of heart patients who take it.
In announcing the recall Friday, Watson Laboratories said that some of the 23,000 bottles of "Furosemide Tablets USP, 40mg" sold to the VA may have been mislabeled as "Verapamil Hydrochloride Tablets 80mg, lot 34401M6."
The recall followed two reports from the Veterans Administration involving 10 bottles of the furosemide tablets that were mislabeled. But the company said no injuries had been reported.
"Both medicines are prescribed for serious, but different heart conditions," a company statement said. "Use of furosemide instead of verapamil hydrochloride could be life-threatening. Accordingly, Watson has requested that affected federal facilities contact patients who may have received incorrect medication."
The Watson furosemide in the mislabeled bottles is a round, white tablet embossed with the words "Watson 301" on one side and scored on the other, the company said.
The mislabeled bottles were actually part of "Furosemide Tablets USP, 40mg, lot 30106X6," all of which was consigned to the Veterans Administration, the company said.
The Veterans Administration may have distributed the incorrectly labeled furosemide to the military services and other federal facilities, which were also being notified of the recall, the company said.
Watson said the real 80mg verapamil hydrochloride is identified as a round, film-coated, peach-colored tablet embossed "Watson 344" on one side and scored on the other.
David Taber, director of regulatory affairs for Watson Laboratories, said in a telephone interview from the company's office in Chicago, that the bottles were shipped to two Veterans Administration depots in February.
The first discovery of mislabeled bottles occurred in late June, he said.
"When the VA examined the total situation … they did their own digging around and concluded there was no problem," he said.
The recall was ordered after another Veterans Administration pharmacy discovered a problem on Sept. 23, he said.
Watson Laboratories is a manufacturer of generic drugs, headquartered in Corona, 45 miles southeast of Los Angeles.

 

End of Document


Possible Life Threat Cited in Recall of Heart Drug
The New York Times
September 27, 1987, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

 Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 39, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 388 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: LOS ANGELES, Sept. 26
Body




A possibly mislabeled drug sold to the Veterans Administration has been recalled by its manufacturer, which warned that taking the wrong medication could endanger the lives of heart patients who took it.
In announcing the recall Friday, Watson Laboratories said that some of the 23,000 bottles of ''Furosemide Tablets USP, 40 mg'' sold to the veterans agency might have been mislabeled as ''Verapamil Hydrochloride Tablets 80 mg, lot 34401M6.''
The recall followed two reports from the Veterans Administration involving 10 bottles of the furosemide tablets that were mislabeled. But the California-based company, which manufactures generic drugs, said no injuries had been reported.
Use 'Could Be Life-Threatening'
''Both medicines are prescribed for serious, but different heart conditions,'' a company statement said. ''Use of furosemide instead of verapamil hydrochloride could be life-threatening. Accordingly, Watson has requested that affected Federal facilities contact patients who may have received incorrect medication.''
The Watson furosemide in the mislabeled bottles is a round, white tablet embossed with the words ''Watson 301'' on one side and scored on the other, the company said.
 
A Peach-Colored Tablet
The mislabeled bottles were actually part of ''Furosemide Tablets USP, 40 mg, lot 30106X6,'' all of which was consigned to the Veterans Administration, the company said.
The Veterans Administration may have distributed the incorrectly labeled furosemide to the military services and other Federal facilities, which were also being notified of the recall, the company said.
Watson said the real 80-milligram verapamil hydrochloride was a round, film-coated, peach-colored tablet embossed ''Watson 344'' on one side and scored on the other.
David Taber, director of regulatory affairs for Watson Laboratories, said in a telephone interview from the company's offices in Chicago, that the bottles were shipped to two Veterans Administration depots in February.
He said the Veterans Administration at first concluded that there was no problem. But he said the recall was ordered after another Veterans Administration pharmacy discovered a problem on Sept. 23.
The first discovery of mislabeled bottles occurred in late June, he said.
Watson Laboratories' headquarters are in Corona, Calif., 45 miles southeast of Los Angeles.

 

End of Document


Company Recalls Mislabled Heart Drug Sold to Veterans Administration
The Associated Press
September 25, 1987, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1987 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 369 words
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




About 23,000 possibly mislabeled bottles of a heart drug sold to the Veterans Administration were recalled Friday by the manufacturer, which warned the mistake could have life-or-death consequences.
Watson Laboratories Inc. of Corona, Calif., said in a statement that some of the bottles in the lot of of 40 milligram tablets of furosemide may have been mislabeled as "Verapamil Hydrochloride Tablets 80mg, lot 34401M6."
The recall followed two reports from the Veterans Administration involving 10 bottles of the furosemide tablets that were mislabeled. No injuries had been reported, the company said.
"Both medicines are prescribed for serious, but different heart conditions," a company statement said. "Use of furosemide instead of verapamil hydrochloride could be life-threatening. Accordingly, Watson has requested that affected federal facilities contact patients who may have received incorrect medication."
The Watson furosemide in the mislabeled bottles is a round, white tablet embossed with the words "Watson 301" on one side and scored on the other, the company said.
The real 80mg verapamil hydrochloride is a round, film-coated, peach-colored tablet embossed "Watson 344" on one side and scored on the other.
The mislabeled bottles were actually part of "Furosemide Tablets USP, 40mg, lot 30106X6," all of which was consigned to the Veterans Administration, the company said.
The Veterans Administration may have distributed the incorrectly labeled furosemide to the uniformed services and other federal facilities, which were also being notified of the recall, the company said.
David Taber, director of regulatory affairs for Watson Laboratories, said in a telephone interview from the company's office in Chicago, that the bottles were shipped to two Veterans Administration depots in February.
The first discovery of mislabeled bottles occurred in late June, he said.
"When the VA examined the total situation … they did their own digging around and concluded there was no problem," he said.
The recall was ordered after another Veterans Administration pharmacy discovered a problem Wednesday, he said.
Watson Laboratories is a manufacturer of generic drugs, based in Corona, 45 miles southeast of Los Angeles.

 

End of Document


BLEEDING FACTOR RECALLED, FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION REPORTS - Correction Appended
PR Newswire

  Correction Appended
 COPYRIGHT 1987 PR Newswire Association, Inc.
Length: 310 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Dec. 10
Body




WASHINGTON, Dec. 10 /PRN/ -- The Food and Drug
Administration said today that Armour Pharmaceutical of Blue Bell,
Pa., is voluntarily withdrawing 208 lots of H.T. Factorate
Antihemophilic Factor (Human) distributed to hemophilia patients and
doctors who treat them.
   The product was made using an old heat treatment.  
Six patients
receiving three lots -- B71308, B71408 and B71508 -- distributed only
in Canada have tested positive for antibody to HIV, the virus that
causes AIDS.  It is not known if the product caused the positive
reactions, but the Canadian government withdrew the product as a
precaution.
   FDA Commissioner Dr. Frank E. Young advised that although all the
cases involved lots distributed only in Canada, other similarly
processed lots are being withdrawn as "an extra precaution."  He said, "Hemophilia who have the Armour product should check with their
doctor, clinic or supplier to see if it is from these lots."
   The H.T. Factorate Antihemophilic Factor involved was
manufactured with a process in which the dry product was heated at
60 degrees centigrade for 30 hours to inactivate the AIDS virus.  
Newer Armour products are processed differently.
   The products being withdrawn in the United States and
internationally have a six-digit code beginning with A or B and have
expiration dates up to December 1988, but not all products with
expiration dates before December 1988 are involved.  Armour
estimates that 2,000 to 5,000 doses are on the market.
   FDA is working closely with the company and the Canadian
government to clarify the problem.
   Physicians, nurses and patients seeking additional information
may call 800-533-6165 (in Pennsylvania, call 800-422-0566).  People
with rotary dial telephones should call Spencer Johnson,
215-540-8109 collect.
CONTACT -- Susan Cruzan of the Food and Drug Administration,
301-443-3285 or, after hours, 301-972-4222
Correction



WASHINGTON, Dec. 11 /PRN/ -- Yesterday, the Food and Drug Administration announced the withdrawal of 208 lots of
Antihemophilic Factorate (Human) by Armour Pharmaceutical of Blue
Bell, Pa.
   Consumers who want to find out whether they have the recalled
product should first contact their doctors or suppliers.
   Physicians, nurses and patients seeking additional information
may use a touch tone telephone during working hours to call
800-533-6165 (Pennsylvania call 800-422-0566), which connects them
with a "voice mail" system.  When they hear a recorded message, they
should then use the extension 7070 for Steve Connelly, 7074 for
Spencer Johnson, or 7077 for Milt Smith.  People with rotary dial
telephones should call Spencer Johnson at 215-540-8109 collect.
CONTACT -- Susan Cruzan of the Food and Drug Administration,
301-443-3285 or, after hours, 301-972-4222 Correction-Date: December 11, 1987, Friday

 

End of Document


Company Recalls High Blood Pressure Drug, Maxide
The Associated Press
July 24, 1989, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 563 words
Byline: By DEBORAH MESCE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A New York pharmaceutical company on Monday recalled a generic anti-hypertensive drug because it said company employees misrepresented samples of the drug submitted for government inspection.
Par Pharmaceutical Inc. of Spring Valley, N.Y., also said it suspended sales of two other government-approved drugs while investigations into them continue.
The recall of Par's generic version of the high-blood-pressure drug Maxide marks the second time this summer a drug company has informed the Food and Drug Administration it had misrepresented its product to the agency.
In each case, the companies marketed formulations of their product that were different than those approved by the FDA.
Par said it had "no reason to believe that there are any adverse health or safety implications involved," and has promised to cooperate with an FDA investigation.
FDA spokesman Bill Grigg said the agency has no concerns about safety of any of the three Par drugs being investigated, but "we are looking into whether the effectiveness of any of these medications was reduced."
The FDA had asked Par to withdraw its generic Maxide from the market as well as its generic Orphengasic Forte, a muscle relaxant, for which the agency found the company falsified records submitted to the FDA, agency spokesman Jeff Nesbit said.
The company is investigating the muscle relaxant for possible recall, but has not decided whether such action is appropriate, he said.
Par and the FDA are also investigating the company's generic Valproic Acid, an anti-convulsant, Nesbit said.
Par and one of the company's founders, Ashok Patel, last week pleaded guilty in U.S. District Court in Baltimore to paying illegal gratuities to FDA employees.
Rep. John Dingell, D-Mich., chairman of the House Energy and Commerce investigations subcommittee, and Rep. Thomas Bliley, R-Va., ranking Republican on the panel, said the disclosure shows that FDA's generic drug regulation is "dangerously lax."
"The problem is we can no longer be reasonably confident that the FDA is able to detect the entry of unsafe or inefficacious generic drugs into the nation's pharmacies," said Dingell, whose panel has been investigating the agency's generic drug division.
Last month, Vitarine Pharmaceuticals of Springfield Gardens, N.Y., told the FDA its employees had substituted samples of FDA-approved Dyazide for its own generic version of the drug to win government approval for its product.
In Par's case, the company said in a statement that "certain product samples furnished to an FDA inspector were intentionally drawn from a production batch other than that represented to the inspector."
The company said officials who could speak about the problem could not be reached Monday for further explanation.
Dingell said his subcommittee has learned that a company official was informed of the sample misrepresentation on July 6. He said he was concerned that the company did not inform the FDA of the problem until Friday.
Par said it would convene a panel of outside consultants to review the company's research and development activities and recordkeeping systems. The consultants will report to a special committee of the company's board of directors, Par said.
Additionally, Par said that "because of the urgency of the investigations of these matters" it has postponed its annual shareholders meeting, which had been scheduled for this Friday.

 

End of Document


Drug Company Recalls Urinary Tract Medicine
The Associated Press
October 9, 1989, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 287 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




A drug company is recalling an antibiotic used to treat urinary tract infections after federal authorities accused the company of cheating on product safety tests.
The Food and Drug Administration, which requested the recall, contends that Bolar Pharmaceutical Co. Inc. of Copiague, N.Y., cheated by using another company's version of the drug when it conducted tests required for FDA approval.
Robert Shulman, president of the company, said in a statement Sunday that Bolar recalled its 100-milligram capsules of nitrofurantoin because of questions raised by the FDA.
"Bolar is concerned first with the ongoing well-being of the people who use our drugs," Shulman said. "The charges that have been made against this product and our company warrant this cautious move on our part while we investigate to determine where the truth lies."
Bolar had been seeking approval for its generic version of nitrofurantoin, which is also sold under the brand name Macrodantin. The brand-name version is made by Norwich-Eaton Pharmaceuticals.
An FDA investigation found evidence that Bolar substituted Macrodantin for its generic version in tests three years ago, FDA spokesman Jeff Nesbit said.
Shulman said the company believed the incident was "not of Bolar's doing." He said the product tested by the FDA was not the same product Bolar provided for laboratory testing.
Bolar, which is the largest of the generic drug makers under FDA scrutiny, won approval in June 1988 for its generic version of nitrofurantoin.
The FDA is investigating other generic drugs made by Bolar as part of its probe of more than a dozen generic drug companies in the wake of allegations of fraud and corruption within the industry and FDA's generic drug division.

 

End of Document


Drug Recalled Because of Misrepresented Samples
The Associated Press
July 25, 1989, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 515 words
Byline: By DEBORAH MESCE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A generic medication used to control high blood pressure is being recalled because samples were misrepresented in a government inspection.
Par Pharmaceutical Inc. of Spring Valley, N.Y., also is suspending the sale of two other drugs pending an investigation.
The action marks the second time this summer a drug company has acknowledged marketing a formulation of a product that was different from that approved by the Food and Drug Administration.
Par Pharmaceutical pulled its generic version of the anti-hypertensive drug Maxzide off the market Monday after telling the FDA that an employee switched a sample of the drug requested by the FDA with a sample from another batch of the drug.
The company also said it was investigating a possible misrepresentation involving its generic Orphengasic Forte, a muscle relaxant, and is considering an FDA request that it be recalled.
Par has suspended sales of the generic muscle relaxant as well as those of its generic Valproic Acid, an anti-convulsant, which is being investigated.
Rep. John Dingell, D-Mich., chairman of the House Energy and Commerce investigations subcommittee, and Rep. Thomas Bliley, R-Va., ranking Republican on the panel, said the disclosure shows that FDA's generic drug regulation is "dangerously lax."
"The problem is we can no longer be reasonably confident that the FDA is able to detect the entry of unsafe or inefficacious generic drugs into the nation's pharmacies," said Dingell, whose panel has been investigating the agency's generic drug division.
Par said it had "no reason to believe that there are any adverse health or safety implications involved" in any of the three drugs it's reviewing, and has promised to cooperate with the FDA.
FDA spokesman Bill Grigg said the agency had no concerns about safety of any of the three Par drugs, but "we are looking into whether the effectiveness of any of these medications was reduced."
Par and one of the company's founders, Ashok Patel, pleaded guilty in U.S. District Court in Baltimore last week to paying illegal gratuities to FDA employees.
The charges are unrelated to the misrepresentation of the company's triamterene and hydrochlorothiazide, which is its generic version of Maxzide, said Barbara Manners, Par vice president and general counsel.
Vitarine Pharmaceuticals of Springfield Gardens, N.Y., said last month that its employees had substituted samples of FDA-approved Dyazide for its own generic version of the drug to win government approval for its product.
Par said in a statement that "certain product samples furnished to an FDA inspector were intentionally drawn from a production batch other than that represented to the inspector."
Par said it would convene a panel of outside consultants to review the company's research and development activities and record-keeping systems. The consultants will report to a special committee of the company's board of directors, Par said.
Additionally, Par said that "because of the urgency of the investigations of these matters" it has postponed its annual shareholders meeting, which had been scheduled for Friday.

 

End of Document


Founder of AIDS Drug Recalls Early Research
The Associated Press
August 21, 1989, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 345 words
Dateline: DETROIT
Body




When the anti-AIDS drug AZT was discovered 25 years ago, AIDS didn't exist and Dr. James Horwitz was dismayed that his efforts to create a cancer cure had failed.
But while Horwitz lacked the foresight to patent his drug, he says he believed at the time that his discovery would eventually be useful.
"What we said at the time, which was very prophetic, is that we have a very interesting class of compounds waiting for a disease to cure," Horwitz, a researcher at the Michigan Cancer Foundation, said in an interview published Monday.
On Thursday, Secretary of Health and Human Services Louis Sullivan recommended immediate Food and Drug Administration approval of AZT for treating people who carried the AIDS antibodies even if they had no symptoms of the disease.
A wide-open market for the drug is bittersweet for Horwitz.
Since he never took out a patent when he developed the compound in 1964, he stands to gain nothing financially from its success. Pharmaceutical analysts have predicted $$1 billion in AZT sales by 1992, and Horwitz could have received huge profits for the first 17 years had he taken out a patent.
"Patents, that's the first question my wife asked me," he said.
AZT was developed as a cancer-fighting drug, but animal studies showed that it wasn't effective. It was put on the shelf until the mid-1980s, when Burroughs Wellcome Co. looked into its use as a treatment for herpes.
That, too, failed. But in 1985, Burroughs Wellcome sent a batch of AZT along with some other drugs to the National Institutes of Health in its search for a drug to fight the human immunodeficiency virus that causes AIDS.
Those experiments showed promise and more were ordered, leading to Sullivan's announcement last week. AZT does not cure AIDS, but it can dramatically slow down the development of the disease.
"Sure, I could be a millionaire," Horwitz said. "But on the other hand, I always felt that if I could leave some legacy regarding my work at the cancer foundation, my life would be meaningful."
"But," he added, "the money would have been nice, don't underestimate it."

 

End of Document


Drug company recalls antibiotic capsules
The Advertiser
October 24, 1987 Saturday

 Copyright 1987 Nationwide News Pty Limited
Length: 380 words
Byline: BARRY HAILSTONE
Body




The SA-based pharmaceutical manufacturer, F. H. Faulding & Co. Ltd, has issued an urgent recall of antibiotic capsules in packets labelled "Eryc".
 The contents of some of the packets have been found to contain a different antibiotic preparation to Eryc.
However, the company said yesterday there was little chance of risk to patients taking the incorrectly packaged medication.
 It only affected a small number of packs in a batch.
 State and Commonwealth health authorities alerted pharmacists yesterday following three reports from pharmacies in NSW of cartons of the preparation Eryc being found to contain blister packs of Faulding's other antibiotic, "Doryx".
 The company voluntarily initiated the recall, which is expected to involve only a few cartons. It said an investigation of its computerised record system showed a very small number of packs in a batch of 60,000 Doryx cartons were incorrectly packaged.
 The company's pharmacist in charge of regulatory affairs, Mr Robert O'Shannassy, said it was not yet known how Eryc containers had become involved in a production run of Doryx.
 Eryc is a commonly prescribed antibiotic for simple infections including respiratory tract and skin problems.
 Doryx, also an antibiotic, is commonly used for a similar range of infections.
 Both have similar antibacterial activity and a wide margin of safety.
 Mr O'Shannassy said there was little chance of a patient's being at risk if they took Doryx instead of Eryc.
 However, some infections such as pneumonia were more specifically dealt with by erhthromycin (Eryc) and there was concern that a patient with a serious or life-threatening illness needing treatment with erythromycin would not get the required effect from Doryx.
 The product was issued for distribution on October 2 and, given normal patterns of stock distribution and rotation, it was likely very few of the packs in question would have reached patients.
 The batch was labelled Eryc 250 milligrams with batch number 7163046. If that batch number, or the capsules inside the container were not branded Eryc, the complete pack should be returned to the pharmacy from which it was dispensed for checking or replacement if necessary.
 Faulding exported Eryc and Doryx to 20 countries but export supplies had not been affected.
 Load-Date: September 19, 2003

 

End of Document


FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION RECALLS COLD MEDICINE
PR Newswire
August 12, 1988, Friday

 COPYRIGHT 1988 PR Newswire Association, Inc.
Length: 219 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Aug 12
Body




WASHINGTON, Aug 12 /PRN/ -- The Food and Drug
Administration asked consumers today to return, for checking by
their pharmacists, any bottle of Promethazine VC Plain syrup, a
prescription allergy and colds medicine, if it contains a thick,
white lotion instead of the normal clear, orange-yellow syrup.
    The white medicinal lotion may be lindane, an external scabies
medicine.
  FDA said the lindane, which is more potent than DDT, might cause
children to suffer severe convulsions which, if untreated, could be
fatal.
    The agency said pint bottles of My-K and Rugby brands of
Promethazine VC Plain syrup made by My-K Laboratories, lot 15880, is
under recall from pharmacies.  Pharmaceutical Basics Inc. of Morton
Grove, Ill., which recently bought My-K Laboratories, began the recall after a pint bottle of the lindane lotion mislabeled as
promethazine syrup was found by a pharmacist in Racine, Wisc., who
alerted Rugby Labs of Rockville Centre, N.Y.
    FDA asked consumers to watch for the white lotion because the
bottles they purchase from pharmacies may not have the lot number or
distributor's name.  In some cases, pharmacists may have transferred
the product to smaller bottles.  The product was made in February
1987.
CONTACT -- Bill Grigg of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration,
301-443-3285 or, after hours, 202-652-1864

 

End of Document


Commons may have to be recalled to pass drug patent bill, PM says
The Toronto Star
July 3, 1987, Friday, FINAL EDITION

 Copyright 1987 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A9
Length: 534 words
Byline: By Joe O'Donnell Toronto Star
Dateline: BAIE COMEAU, Quebec
Body



BAIE COMEAU, Que. - A recall of Parliament may be needed because of Senate delays in passing controversial drug patent legislation, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney has warned.
"I won't exclude calling Parliament back at the appropriate time," Mulroney told reporters here yesterday during a visit to his hometown in the northeastern Quebec riding of Manicouagan.
The bill, which would provide new prescription drugs with extended patent protection, is one of three important pieces of legislation that were still tied up in the Senate when the House of Commons adjourned on Tuesday for a 2 1/2-month summer break.
The Progressive Conservative government imposed limits on debate to ram the drug bill past Liberal and New Democrat opposition.
'Have spoken'
Mulroney said yesterday that "the elected members of Parliament have spoken" on the drug bill and sent it on to the Senate.
Senators then sent a committee across the country taking evidence, and last week approved further study of the bill. That now is scheduled to begin Tuesday.
The House of Commons is not scheduled to resume until Sept. 14. Thus, if Mulroney wants the bill passed this summer, he would have to recall the Commons.
If the Senate amended the bill and passed it, it would go back to MPs for acceptance or rejection. Even if senators pass the legislation intact, both the Commons and Senate have to be sitting for the royal assent ceremony - final stage in the legislative process.
Under current drug laws, companies can make low-cost "generic" copies of drugs on payment of a royalty to the original manufacturer. The drug bill before the Senate would change this, giving new drugs up to 10 years of exclusive marketing rights before generic copies could be sold.
Liberal 'spooking'
Critics say the lack of generic competition would drive up prices, but the government says a review board would monitor prices and act against companies that abuse the new rules.
The other two bills tied up in the Senate would loosen regulations covering the transportation industry.
Yesterday, Mulroney said of the Senate delays: "You know what's going on: You know that the Liberal members of the House are spooking their own leader and they're trying to spook the House of Commons."
These were apparent references to the majority Liberal senators who have tied up the bill in the upper chamber - and to criticism of John Turner's leadership from within the Liberal caucus recently.
The Commons, the Prime Minister added, "is sovereign. It is supreme . . . . And I think it would be inappropriate for the Senate to attempt to sabotage and frustrate the will of the duly elected members of the House of Commons."
If he had to call the Commons back to deal with the matter in the middle of the summer, "so be it," Mulroney said.
He said he will discuss possible options with Government House Leader Don Mazankowski "in the next couple of days - and we'll see where it is then."
Can't force
A spokesman for Mazankowski said in Ottawa yesterday that government efforts to pass the three bills are on hold and there will be no immediate recall of Parliament, The Star's Arch MacKenzie reports.
 Load-Date: May 13, 1999

 

End of Document


FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION ANNOUNCES RECALL
PR Newswire
September 8, 1987, Tuesday

 COPYRIGHT 1987 PR Newswire Association, Inc.
Length: 233 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 4
Body




WASHINGTON, Sept. 4 /PRN/ -- The Food and Drug
Administration said today that Geneva Generics of Broomfield, Colo.,
is recalling nationwide about 4,600 bottles of its version of a
heart and high blood pressure drug called propranolol hydrochloride,
manufactured by Cord Laboratories, also of Broomfield.
   The voluntary recall began after one bottle was found in a Geneva
Generics' Knoxville, Tenn., warehouse to contain a drug called
metronidazole, an antibacterial drug used in treating conditions
such as intestinal parasites.
 Under recall is lot number 65356 of 100/40-milligram tablet
bottles. Geneva's propranolol hydrochloride is a round green tablet
scored and embossed GG73. The metronidazole, if present, would be an
elongated white tablet embossed with GG195.
   FDA Commissioner Dr. Frank E. Young said:  ''Since propranolol is
prescribed after heart attacks and in other critical cardiovascular
conditions, failure to get the correct medicine could be
life-threatening.  Propranolol hydrochloride should not be
discontinued abruptly.''
   Any of Geneva Generics' propranolol hydrochloride 40 milligram
tablets, lot number 65356, not embossed with GG73 should be
exchanged at the place of purchase.
   No other mislabeled bottles have been found to date, FDA said,
and there have been no injuries reported.
CONTACT -- Bill Grigg of the Food and Drug Administration,
301-443-3285, or after hours, 202-652-1864

 

End of Document


Drug Manufacturer Recalls Cold Syrups, Citing Health Risks
The New York Times
January 1, 1988, Friday, Late City Final Edition

 Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 38, Column 6; National Desk
Length: 242 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Dec. 31
Body




Several brands of an over-the-counter cold medicine are being recalled because they may be mislabeled and might contain a potent tranquilizer, the Food and Drug Administration said today.
The tranquilizer, haloperidol, could prove fatal, especially to children, if taken in the amounts normally associated with nonprescription cold medicines, agency officials said.
The F.D.A. said My-K Laboratories of Morton Grove, Ill., is recalling all four-ounce bottles of its cold medicine bearing lot 15718 with an expiration date of 12/88.
The bottles, all of which would bear the same lot number and expiration date, were sold under the following brand names:
* Myfed Syrup, distributed to military as well as civilian stores.
* Life-Line Trifed Syrup, distributed by Life-Line Pharmaceutical of Hayward, Calif.
* URL Uni-Fed Syrup, distributed by United Research Laboratories of Philadelphia.
* Walgreen Wal-Act Syrup, distributed by Walgreen Co. of Deerefield, Ill.
* Osco Aphedrid Syrup, distributed by Osco Drug Inc. of Oak Brook, Ill.
Through mislabeling, some of the bottles sold as cold medicine are believed instead to contain haloperidol, a clear, odorless solution.
The recall involves about 105,000 white plastic bottles distributed throughout the United States in the past year. It is not known how many may contain the wrong drug.
The correct cold medicine solution is a yellow liquid, with a lemon fragance, consisting of a decongestant and an antihistamine.

 

End of Document


BARNES RECALLS VOTES BY A DRUG 'COUNCIL' TO MURDER INFORMERS
The New York Times
October 19, 1983, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

 Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Page 4, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk
Length: 302 words
Byline: By ARNOLD H. LUBASCH
Body




Leroy (Nicky) Barnes, a heroin dealer who turned informer, testified yesterday about how he and other members of a ''council'' of drug dealers had voted to kill several informers.
''We had a vote on it - and we voted that he had to be terminated,'' he said, describing the council's decision to murder a suspected informer in 1975.
Leroy (Nicky) Barnes, testifying in narcotics trial of 8 defendants, Federal District Court, NYC, describes how he and other members of 'council' of drug dealers voted in '75 to kill several suspected informers (S)
Recalling the 1976 murder of a heroin supplier who was suspected of informing, Mr. Barnes said, ''We decided that termination would be the only way that we would remove this problem.''
He testified for the second day in the narcotics trial of eight defendants in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
He said one defendant, Elmer T. Morris Jr., a former police officer in Tuckahoe, N.Y., had provided information to confirm the council's suspicions about several informers before they were murdered.
A man named Joseph Beechum was killed in 1975 after Mr. Morris had checked ''his sources'' and confirmed that the man was an informer, Mr. Barnes said. He said another defendant, Frank A. James, had lured the man to a meeting. ''He turned around and shot him in the face,'' Mr. Barnes said, testifying that Mr. James had shot the man in a car. He said Mr. James had told him about it later.
Five defendants were identified by Mr. Barnes as council members - Mr. James, Guy T. Fisher, Wallace Rice, Thomas Forman and Ishmael Muhammed. Three defendants, Mr. Morris, Robert J. Wheelings and Kenneth Thomas, were charged with working for the council. Mr. Barnes testified for the Government in the hope of obtaining his release from a 1978 sentence of life in prison without parole.

 

End of Document


FDA Says Heart, Blood Pressure Drug Is Recalled After Mislabeling
The Associated Press
September 4, 1987, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1987 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 217 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A generic drug distributor in Colorado is recalling 4,600 bottles of its version of the heart and high blood pressure medicine propranolol hydrochloride because a bottle was found containing the wrong drug, the Food and Drug Administration said Friday.
The nationwide recall was issued by Geneva Generics, based in Broomfield, Colo., after a bottle was found in a Knoxville, Tenn., warehouse containing a drug called metronidazole, used in treating intestinal parasites.
The propranolol hydrochloride is manufactured by Cord Laboratories, also of Broomfield, about 15 miles from Denver, the FDA said.
The FDA said the bottle in Knoxville was the only mislabled one found to date and no injuries have been reported.
Under recall is lot number 65356. The bottles contain 100 tablets of 40 milligrams each. The FDA said the correct medicine is a round, green tablet embossed with GG73. The metronidazole, if present, is an elongated white tablet embossed GG195.
"Since propranalol hydrochloride is prescribed after heart attacks and in other critical cardiovascular conditions, failure to get the correct medicine could be life-threatening," said FDA Commissioner Frank E. Young, M.D.
He said that the drug should not be discontinued abruptly, and any of the recalled product should be exchanged where it was bought.

 

End of Document


Drug Firm Agrees to Recall Cattle Implants
The Associated Press
April 1, 1980, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1980 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 317 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A drug distributor has agreed to recall stocks of DES implants which it shipped illegally and were used on at least 50,000 head of cattle, the government said Tuesday.
DES, which has the generic name diethylstilbestrol, is known to cause cancer in animals as well as humans and has been found to leave residues in edible animal tissue.
The recall was announced jointly by the Food and Drug Administration and the Department of Agriculture. The shipments were made by Walco International Inc., of Porterville, Calif. The implants were for use in cattle and sheep to increase the rate and efficiency of weight gain.
But FDA banned the distribution and use of DES for this purpose last year because of its cancer-causing properties.
The ban called for an end to the manufacture or shipment of DES for use in animals after July 13, 1979. All use of DES in animals was to end after Nov. 1, 1979, and violation of the ban carried the risk of legal penalties.
FDA asked the company to recall its shipment after it found out that distribution had taken place after the July 13 cutoff. The company agreed.
About 50,000 cattle in the Midwest and the Southwest received illegal DES implants after the Nov. 1 deadline. FDA said the cattle cannot be sold for food use until the agency has completed an investigation to determine whether and how the animals can be safely used.
USDA is preparing a sampling plan to detect illegal DES residues in slaughtered animals and to prevent their sale to consumers. But neither agency said when that plan would be ready to be put into operation.
The agencies offered no immediate word on penalties the company might face for making the DES implant shipments. The maximum penalty for violation of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act with intent to defraud and mislead is three years imprisonment and a $10,000 fine.
No explanation for why the shipment was made was available immediately.

 

End of Document


Retired General Recalls Frustration at Watching Drug Runners at Work
The Associated Press
June 5, 1985, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1985 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 519 words
Byline: By GENE GRABOWSKI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Retired Gen. Paul F. Gorman recalls with anger the frustration he felt when he commanded U.S. armed forces in Latin America but was powerless to stop smugglers from shipping tons of drugs northward through the Panama Canal.
"I sat at my breakfast table in Panama and watched boats loaded with marijuana go by on their way to the United States," Gorman told a Senate panel Tuesday. "I saw enough instances of drug smuggling during my command to lead me to itch for authority to arrest the dealers."
Gorman, who retired in March after two years in charge of the U.S. Southern Command, urged the Senate Appropriations subcommittee on defense to authorize military units in Latin America to help foreign governments locate and destroy drug-making operations.
"Only the Department of Defense has the capability, surveillance units and equipment to do the job," Gorman said.
"I'm not here to advocate the use of Air Force wings or helicopter squadrons. I'm saying we should supply the intelligence-gathering capability of the armed forces," he said.
Gorman said Latin American drug dealers produce and ship most of the marijuana and cocaine and a significant amount of the heroin used in the United States. He said the drugs move through a "regionwide, well-financed, illegal, transnational infrastructure" that can only be shut down if attacked before drugs cross the U.S. border.
In large part, Gorman's testimony endorsed a measure proposed by Sen. Dennis DeConcini, D-Ariz., which calls for creation of a unit of 16 C-130 airplanes equipped with radar, cameras and other tracking devices to work under the direction of the Southern Command.
But if that plan proves unacceptable to Congress, Gorman suggested outfitting C-130 planes owned by Latin American governments with the necessary equipment.
"Our proper role is technical assistance, and I would like to see that increased," Gorman said.
Sen. Jim Sasser, D-Tenn., asked whether it would be more effective to allow U.S. troops to conduct anti-drug strikes and make arrests after drug operations are spotted.
"There might be a justification for that if we knew the next stop for the drugs is the United States, but I cannot see us getting approval from governments allowing us to take over," Gorman said, adding later that "whenever we get American troops doing the work of foreign governments, we are risking a severe policy mistake."
Under questioning, he refused to say whether Cuba or Nicaragua are actively engaged in smuggling drugs to the United States, but he said drug movement is so widespread "it could only come about" with help from the Cuban government.
DeConcini's proposal, an amendment to the 1986 defense authorization bill, is estimated to cost about $142 million its first year and $42 million each year after that.
The House is considering a bill proposed by Rep. Charles Bennett, D-Fla., which would allow the military to assist federal drug agents in seizures and arrests at sea.
Current law allows the military to share information and equipment with U.S. drug agents, but prohibits military personnel from assisting in drug searches, seizures or arrests.

 

End of Document


FDA orders drug firm to recall press release about medicine
The San Diego Union-Tribune
April 13, 1986 Sunday

 Copyright 1986 The San Diego Union-Tribune
Section: LOCAL; Pg. B-10
Length: 350 words
Byline: From News Services
Body




The Food and Drug Administration has taken the unusual step of telling a Costa Mesa drug manufacturer to recall a press release it had issued on the safety and effectiveness of one of its medicines. The federal agency accused ICN Pharmaceuticals of issuing a press kit that included false or misleading statements about its drug Virazole.
The drug had been approved by the agency for the treatment of respiratory syncytial virus infection, but the FDA said that the press release exaggerated both the severity of the illness it was designed to treat and the effectiveness of the drug in treating other illnesses. A spokesman for the agency said that the action, initiated in a letter on March 24, appeared to be only the second time that it had moved in such a way against a drug maker.
The previous incident, he said, involved a press release promoting the drug Oraflex that was distributed by Eli Lilly & Co. The federal agency cited the following statement in the press release as false or misleading: "Virazole holds a great potential because of its broad-spectrum antiviral action.
The drug's usefulness in combating respiratory syncytial virus, influenza, measles, chicken pox, herpes simplex and herpes zoster, hepatitis A, Lassa fever and sandfly fever has been demonstrated in worldwide clinical research." In a letter to the chairman of ICN, Milan Panic, the agency said: "The press kit grossly exaggerates the efficacy of Virazole beyond the single, limited indication provided in the approved labeling in that there are numerous representations and suggestions of efficacy in a wide variety of viral infections." The FDA spokesman, William Grigg, said that the agency could take the action because press releases were regarded as an extension of drug labeling, over which it has authority. Other government agencies, such as the Security and Exchange Commission, have acted against press releases issued by corporations. An official of the American Civil Liberties Union said he did not know enough about the case to comment on whether the action constituted a First Amendment free-speech issue.
 Load-Date: August 10, 2007

 

End of Document


Bush Anti-Drug Proposals Recall Rocky's New York War
The Associated Press
September 7, 1989, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 633 words
Byline: By MARC HUMBERT, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ALBANY, N.Y.
Body




Tougher prison sentences, more treatment, more prison cells, more judges, more police and more money. President Bush's 1989 national war on drugs? No, Nelson Rockefeller's 1973 New York war on drugs.
Calling for an end to a "reign of terror," the then-governor told the Legislature in early 1973:
"What is needed now is a truly effective deterrent to the pushing of drugs so that innocent people will not fall victim to the pusher's tactics or be robbed, mugged or murdered by him."
With that, Rockefeller proposed mandatory life sentences for drug dealers.
The late New York Republican, who went on to become vice president, also asked for 100 new judges and more than 6,000 new prison cells.
He got the money for those and for 30,000 new drug-treatment spaces. And, with some modification to make the proposal less Draconian, Rockefeller got stiff mandatory prison sentences for pushers. He even got approval for a $$1,000 bounty to those who turned in drug dealers.
New Yorkers got a bill that year for an extra $$67 million.
Rockefeller, having largely failed with earlier programs for voluntary and then mandatory drug treatment, was trying what he called "the toughest drug law in the nation."
"When are we going to open the concentration camps?" Democratic state Sen. Manfred Ohrenstein asked at the time. He, and others, predicted failure.
In fact, after a brief decline, felony drug arrests were on the rise again by late 1974 in New York.
State officials reported last month that New York City's violent crime rate, linked largely to drug-related cases, rose by 9.8 percent in 1988.
"It didn't make a goddamn dent on anything," Ohrenstein said this week of Rockefeller's war on drugs.
Ohrenstein, who now serves as Senate minority leader, said he views the Bush drug offensive in much the same light.
"Each time, we were deceiving the American public," said Ohrenstein. "I think we keep trying without trying to face up to what really is the problem … What's wrong with us that there are so many people who need a fix every day?"
Noting that the state had pumped million of dollars into education and treatment programs during the 1960s with little success before moving to tough punishment in 1973, then-Republican Assemblyman Dominick DiCarlo said the get-tough policy failed because it was simply too tough.
DiCarlo, now a judge on the U.S. Court of International Trade, also complained of the approach used in New York.
"We would concentrate on one aspect at a time," said DiCarlo, who joined the Reagan administration in 1981 as the State Department's assistant secretary for international narcotics control. "Hopefully, what the president is doing now is concentrating on the entire area."
Republican Warren Anderson, who had just taken over as Senate majority leader the year Rockefeller's tough anti-drug laws were adopted, also hopes Bush's move to attack the drug problem on all fronts at once may make it more successful than Rockefeller's approach.
"We tried so many different things," said Anderson, who retired from the Legislature last year after 16 years as the Senate leader. "Here we are 17 years later and, if anything, the conditions are worse. I don't think you can say it (Rockefeller's program) was a failure, but it wasn't a success either."
Even Democrat Ohrenstein said the Rockefeller approach wasn't a complete miscalculation.
"To what degree did it hold back the tide for a little while or staunch the flow of blood for a little while? It's hard to say," he said. "Should we not have tried at all? The answer is, we should have tried."
The Rockefeller-era drug laws have since been eased in New York state. Former Gov. Hugh Carey and current Gov. Mario Cuomo, both Democrats, have granted clemency to some drug dealers given mandatory life sentences under the Rockefeller drug laws.

 

End of Document


URGENT RECALL OF DRUGS
COURIER-MAIL
November 26, 1987 Thursday

 Copyright 1987 Nationwide News Pty Limited
Length: 132 words
Byline: AAPAUSNEWS
Body




Urgent recall of drugs CANBERRA._ A batch of pharmaceutical drugs almost 10 times the labelled strength and used to treat some forms of cancer have been listed for urgent recall.
QNPCommonwealth health authorities said a bottle of Stiboestrol tablets from batch No 205026 had been found to contain 5 mg strength tablets instead of 0.5 strength. A health spokesman said yesterday it was not known whether the entire batch was affected, but all would be recalled as a precaution. He said the tablets usually were used to correct some hormone imbalances or deficiencies, or to treat some forms of cancer. He said the main concern in taking the increased dosage was an increased risk of blood clotting. All tablets from the affected batch should be returned to the pharmacy where they were bought.
 Load-Date: September 19, 2003

 

End of Document


COMPANY NEWS; Par Recalls Drugs Pending Inquiry
The New York Times
July 25, 1989, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section D; Page 4, Column 3; Financial Desk
Length: 128 words
Byline: By Reuters
Body




Par Pharmaceutical Inc., a Spring Valley, N.Y., drug maker that was charged with making illegal payments to a Government official, said it was recalling two anti-hypertensive drugs, triamterene and hydrochlorothiazide, the generic components of a drug known as Maxzide.
Par said the drugs were being recalled pending an investigation into the possibility that samples furnished to a Food and Drug Administration inspector were intentionally drawn from a product batch other than the one represented to the inspector.
Par said it had brought this possibility to the attention of F.D.A. officials on Friday. The company said it had no reason to believe that any safety matter was at stake, but it postponed its annual shareholders meeting, which had been scheduled for Friday.

 

End of Document


DRUG RECALL FOR DIABETICS
COURIER-MAIL
November 21, 1986 Friday

 Copyright 1986 Nationwide News Pty Limited
Length: 71 words
Byline: AAPGROUP
Body




Drug recall for diabetics MELBOURNE._ The Commonwealth Health Department has recalled the drug glimel, an oral preparation used to treat diabetics.
QNPThe Federal Health Minister, Dr Blewett, yesterday advised diabetics to return glimel to their doctors but said there had been no reports of adverse drug reactions. He said glimel was recalled because of doubts about the data used to establish its rate of release into the body.
 Load-Date: September 18, 2003

 

End of Document


Drug Recall Is Announced
The New York Times
October 23, 1989, Monday, Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk
Length: 171 words
Byline: Reuters
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Oct, 22
Body




The American Home Products Corporation is recalling three generic drugs after Federal regulators found that a subsidiary of the company had mispresented drug data to regulators.
American Home, a leading maker of brand-name drugs, said Friday that it had agreed to recall three drugs produced by Quantum Pharmics, a subsidiary based in Amityville, L.I.
Last month, American Home temporarily suspended operations at Quantum after a Food and Drug Administration inspection uncovered evidence that some drug data might have been misrepresented to the agency.
The inspection was part of the year-long investigation of the drug industry.
Among the products the Food and Drug Administration requested Quantum to recall was its minoxidil tablets, a treatment to couner balding.
American Home previously had agreed to recall four generic products including diazepam, a tranquilizer, because of concerns about data submitted to the agency in the original applications.
''No safety problem with the products is known,'' the Federal agency said.

 

End of Document


WIRE CAUSES DRUG RECALL
COURIER-MAIL
July 23, 1988 Saturday

 Copyright 1988 Nationwide News Pty Limited
Length: 107 words
Byline: AAPAUSNEWS
Body




replaces skills Wire causes drug recall CANBERRA._ An urgent recall has been issued for a batch of the antibiotic drug Achromycin V capsules 250mg after small pieces of stainless steel wire were found in some capsules.
QNPThe Department of Community Health and Services said the drug was being urgently recalled by Cyanamid Australia Pty Ltd. The batch number is 8G048A. The department said 7137 packs of 25 capsules were released in mid-June. Anyone who has been prescribed the drug should check the batch number of the manufacturer's label. If the batch number was 8G048A, the pack and contents should be returned to the dispensing pharmacy.
 Load-Date: September 20, 2003

 

End of Document


DRUG BATCH RECALLED
COURIER-MAIL
March 19, 1987 Thursday

 Copyright 1987 Nationwide News Pty Limited
Length: 100 words
Byline: HAMMOND P
Body




Drug batch recalled A BRISBANE drug company, Alphapharm Pty Ltd, is urgently recalling a batch of a drug marketed under the name deralin.
QNPA Royal Brisbane Hospital pharmacist said last night that deralin was a brand-name for the drug propranolol. It is used in the treatment of hypertension, angina, anxiety-induced tachycardia (speeding up of the heart beat), cardiac arythmia and migraine. Alphapharm's recall notice said that although there had been no reported problems with batch number 8605007, it was being recalled because it did not meet the requirements of a standard US pharmaceutical test.
 Load-Date: September 19, 2003

 

End of Document


GENERIC ANTICONVULSANT RECALLED BY DRUG COMPANY FOR INEFFECTIVENESS - Correction Appended
PR Newswire

  Correction Appended
 COPYRIGHT 1988 PR Newswire Association, Inc.
Length: 153 words
Dateline: NEW YORK, Sept. 22
Body




NEW YORK, Sept. 22 /PRN/ -- Once again, generic
anticonvulsants have been found to be ineffective in controlling
epileptic seizures.
    Pharmaceutical Basics, of Colorado, recalled batches of its
generic carbamazepine on Sept. 21 because the drug was found to
dissolve too slowly in the bloodstream to be fully effective.
  A similar problem occurred last January when the FDA recalled 14
lots of generic phenytoin, another anticonvulsant, which had been
distributed by Veterans Administration Hospitals.  Dilantin, a
mainstay of epileptic therapy for fifty years and the original
version of phenytoin, now has been substituted for the generic form
at VA hospitals nationwide.
    At the time, Gordon Sclar, a VA spokesperson in Syracuse, said,
"People who received the low-potency drug may experience seizures,
because the drug was too weak to prevent them.
CONTACT -- Liz Scherer of Cohn & Wolfe, 212-598-3600, for
Pharmaceutical Basics
Correction



In NY101, "Generic Anticonvulsant Recalled by Drug Company for
Ineffectiveness," the contact was incorrectly identified by PR
Newswire as representing Pharmaceutical Basics, the manufacturers who
made the voluntary recall.  We have been advised by Cohn & Wolfe that
they released the information on behalf of Parke-Davis, manufacturers
of Dilantin (phenytoin), another anticonvulsant. Correction-Date: September 23, 1988, Friday

 

End of Document


FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION TODAY RECALLED ACIDOPHILUS CAPSULES WHICH MAY BE MIXED WITH DANGEROUS S
PR Newswire
December 12, 1989, Tuesday

 Copyright 1989 PR Newswire Association, Inc.
Length: 348 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Dec. 12
Body




WASHINGTON, Dec. 12 /PRN/ -- The Food and Drug Administration
today urged consumers not to use Vitamin Specialities brand acidophilus
capsules with lot number 069296 on the package because some bottles
contain other capsules with high levels of stannous fluoride, which when
swallowed in quantity can sicken or kill an adult or child.
    FDA asked purchasers to return the capsules to their place of
purchase or destroy them.  Manufactured by Vita-Pure, the capsules were
packed and distributed by Vitamin Specialties Co. of Wyncote, Pa., which
has asked its 22 retail stores in New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania
to recall the products.  The firm said that 140 mail order customers
also were notified.
  The recall was initiated in late October after two consumers
complained of vomiting and flu-like symptoms after using the products.
Since only a small number of bottles have been returned, FDA is
concerned that consumers may still have products in their homes.  Some
950 bottles, each containing 100 capsules, have been distributed since
July 1.
    Product samples analyzed by FDA's Philadelphia laboratories
disclosed the presence of smaller sized capsules mixed in with the
slightly larger acidophilus capsules.  The smaller capsules had an
average stannous fluoride content of 784 milligrams.
    While a low level of stannous fluoride is safe in toothpaste, FDA
says the 784 milligram dose could cause convulsions in an adult.  Five
capsules could cause death in an adult and one capsule could be lethal
to a small child.  Fortunately, the dosage may cause such
gastrointestinal upset that vomiting could limit the amount ingested and
subsequent adverse effects.
    The product's label says:  "Supplies friendly bacteria to the
intestinal tract.  Helps to restore and maintain a favorable flora and
improve the health of the mucous membrane which lines the stomach and
intestine."  The label also states that each capsule contains a minimum
of 100 million Lactobacillus Acidophilus micro-organisms.
CONTACT -- Chris Lecos of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration,
202-245-1144, or, after hours, 703-354-4418

 

End of Document


Hoechst Drugs Recalled
Financial Times (London,England)
March 2, 1988, Wednesday
London

 Copyright 1988 The Financial Times Limited
Section: SECTION I; American News; Pg. 4
Length: 199 words
Byline: John Barham, Sao Paulo
Body




Brazilian health officials are recalling nine drugs produced by Hoechst's Brazilian subsidiary because of concerns that the drugs might have been made with blood containing AIDS antibodies.
Hoechst, the West German chemicals and pharmaceuticals group said yesterday that its products "are not capable of contaminating or infecting" patients, because antibodies do not transmit AIDS.
Last week, state government laboratories in southern Brazil found that the products contained AIDS antibodies and so tested positive for AIDS.  That prompted other states to seize the drugs, which include human albumin and gamma globulin, which are all made with blood derivatives.
Mr Sinesio Fogaca, a Hoechst executive, said: "The big problem is that the population is easily frightened and does not know the difference between AIDS and the antibodies." Patients taking the drugs will test positive for AIDS for about six months.
Hoechst said the lots found to contain the AIDS antibodies were produced prior to 1985, when AIDS screening became mandatory.  The drugs have a shelf-life of five years.  Mr Fogaca said blood used before 1985 was rigorously purified and cannot transmit any disease.

 

End of Document


REAGAN RECALLS OFFICIALS FOR DRUG ABUSE BRIEFINGS
COURIER-MAIL
August 8, 1986 Friday

 Copyright 1986 Nationwide News Pty Limited
Length: 156 words
Byline: COSTELLO D
Body




Reagan recalls officials for drug abuse briefings WASHINGTON._ President Reagan, declaring he meant business in his crusade against drug abuse, said yesterday a number of United States ambassadors would be called home next month for special consultations on the drug problem.
QNPMr Reagan said the ambassadors would be briefed on what was being done to curb domestic drug consumption so they could inform officials in other nations. The United Nations Division of Narcotics Drugs had completed work on a draft international treaty that would permit the confiscation of all assets derived from illegal drug trafficking, a UN official said yesterday. Undersecretary-general William Buffum, the top-ranked American in the UN Secretariat and UN program co-ordinator for drug-abuse control, said one of the most significant provisions of the treaty would declare it an international crime to knowingly acquire or launder illegal drug money. AP
 Load-Date: September 18, 2003

 

End of Document


Drug recall: steel wire in capsules
The Advertiser
July 25, 1988 Monday

 Copyright 1988 Nationwide News Pty Limited
Length: 135 words
Body




CANBERRA - An urgent recall has been issued for a batch of the antibiotic drug Achromycin V in 250-milligram capsules after small pieces of stainless steel wire were found in some of the capsules.
 A Department of Community Health and Services statement said the drug was being recalled by Cyanamid Australia Pty Ltd.
aap
It said 7137 packs of 25 capsules were released in mid-June this year.
 Anyone prescribed the drug should check the batch number of the manufacturer's label.
 Packs with batch number 8G048A should be returned with their contents to the dispensing pharmacy.
 "If patients have taken capsules which contained wire, the likely outcome is for the wire to pass through the body without causing harm," the statement said.
 "Should abdominal pain or tenderness occur, patients should consult their doctor."
 Load-Date: September 20, 2003

 

End of Document


Cholesterol drug recalled by Bristol-Myers
United Press International
May 17, 1988, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1988 U.P.I.
Section: Financial
Length: 181 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Bristol-Myers Co. said Tuesday it has recalled about 200 million doses of Questran, an anti-cholesterol drug, from retailers because of contamination by small quantities of insecticides.
The contaminated drugs, however, pose no serious health threats and are not being recalled from consumers, said Rolland Eckels, a Bristol-Myers spokesman in Evansville, Ill.
''It is our position that there is nothing wrong with the product. It is safe to take,'' Eckels said, adding that no illnesses have been reported from the drug.
''The recall was initiated by Bristol laboratories after it was determined that certain batches of the resins used in production contained very low levels of two agricultural chemicals,'' he said.
The recall involves batches of the drug with expiration dates from August, 1988 through Oct. 1, 1991. Four addition batches with label identification codes MKH81, MKH82, MLH46 and MLH47 also are being recalled.
Bristol-Myers was notified of the contamination by Rohm & Haas Co., the Philadelphia chemical company that made the cholestyramine resin used to manufacture Questran.

 

End of Document


COMPANY NEWS; U.S. Inspection Leads to Lilly Recall
The New York Times
September 13, 1989, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section D; Page 4, Column 1; Financial Desk
Length: 490 words
Byline: By WARREN E. LEARY, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 12
Body




Eli Lilly & Company said today that it was recalling 18 lots of 10 drugs from wholesalers and stopping distribution of all products from an Indianapolis plant because of manufacturing problems found in a Federal inspection.
The company, based in Indianapolis, said it took the action after receiving an inspection report on Aug. 25 from the Food and Drug Administration that outlined cases in which practices required by the agency were not followed.
Lilly said in a statement that it was confident of the safety and effectiveness of drugs made at the plant. It said a company task force, which is working with the F.D.A. to bring the plant back into compliance, had recommended a voluntary recall of the drugs.
The recall involves at least tens of thousands of pills and capsules, a Lilly spokesman said, adding that a specific number was not available.
Jeff Nesbit, an F.D.A. spokesman, said an agency inspection of the plant between April 17 and Aug. 25 had found objectionable conditions for making pills and capsules and ''quality-assurance and record-keeping problems.''
The deficiencies, similar to some uncovered recently in plant inspections of generic drug manufacturers, ''are not uncommon'' among the companies the F.D.A. regulates, he said.
Edward A. West, a spokesman for Lilly, said the company had recalled the drugs from its distribution network because the manufacturing process was not in compliance with F.D.A.-approved procedures. He said, however, that there were no indications of any safety or effectiveness problems with the products and that inventories in pharmacies were not affected by the recall.
''We have pulled samples from every lot, and without exception every lot meets potency and safety standards,'' Mr. West said in a telephone interview.
He said there would probably not be a disruption in the supply of the medications. There should be an adequate supply on retail shelves to take care of normal needs, he said.
The plant that was shut down, one of seven Lilly plants in Indianapolis and 30 worldwide, produces only a small portion of the capsules and tablets made by the company and is not responsible for any of Lilly's leading products, he said.
''Our major product lines will not be affected by this recall,'' Mr. West continued. ''The products made at this facility are what we call infrequently manufactured products.''
The factory is back to making full production runs, the spokesman said, but no products can be shipped until the F.D.A. reviews the procedures and inspects the newly made drugs.
The drugs that will be recalled and destroyed include lots of Methadone Hydrochloride, 40 milligram tablets; Aventyl, 10 milligram capsules; Sulfapyridine, 0.5 gram tablets; Sulfadiazine, 0.5 gram tablets; Darvon with A.S.A. capsules; Darvon-N with A.S.A. tablets; Nalfon, 600 milligram tablets; Dolophine Hydrochloride, 5 milligram tablets; Tapazole, 5 milligram tablets, and Tapazole, 10 milligram tablets.

 

End of Document


FAULTY RECORDS AT LILLY PROMPT DRUG RECALL
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 14, 1989, THURSDAY, FIVE STAR Edition

 Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 6B
Length: 93 words
Body




INDIANAPOLIS (AP) - Eli Lilly & Co. says it has recalled batches of 10 prescription drugs and halted distribution from its plant here because of record-keeping violations found by federal inspectors.  The pharmaceutical maker said it is confident there was nothing wrong with the safety or effectiveness of the drugs, which were recalled Tuesday from wholesalers and had never reached pharmacies.  An inspection by the Food and Drug Administration last month found objectionable conditions in nearly every area of Lilly's Indianapolis capsule and tablet plant.
 Load-Date: October 25, 1993

 

End of Document


U.S. Announces Recall Of Defective Heart Drug
The New York Times
December 26, 1980, Friday, Late City Final Edition

 Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 17, Column 6; National Desk
Length: 195 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Dec. 25
Body




The Food and Drug Administration announced yesterday the recall of a brand of heart drug that it says is dangerously under strength because the tablets fail to deliver enough medicine to the bloodstream.
The defective product, made of quinidine gluconate, is made by the Bolar Pharmaceutical Company of Copiague, N.Y., which is cooperating with the recall, according to a drug agency spokesman.
AN-A
Agency officials said use of the Bolar product could be fatal in situations where a full dose is needed to prevent irregularities in heart rhythm.
The officials said that persons with the drug should continue to use it but should immediately contact their doctors to be switched to another product.
The spokesman said that the Bolar product is a plain white tablet, a half inch in diameter. The products approved by the drug agency are Qinatulte Dura-Tabs, made by Berlex Laboratories, and Duraquin, made by Parke Davis Company.
The drug is sold under the Bolar label and 10 private labels: Rugby, Bioline, Murray, H.L. Moore, Interstate Drug Exchange, Gramercy, Spencer-Mead, United Research Laboratories, Three P Products and the Goldline Brand of the Generix Drug Corporation.

 

End of Document


GENERIC ANTICONVULSANT RECALLED BY FDA FOR INEFFECTIVENESS
PR Newswire
January 18, 1988, Monday

 COPYRIGHT 1988 PR Newswire Association, Inc.
Length: 252 words
Dateline: NEW YORK, Jan. 18
Body




NEW YORK, Jan. 18 /PRN/ -- Veterans Administration
hospitals have begun to supply patients with a brand-name epilespy
drug in response to a Food and Drug Administration letter telling
them to stop dispensing a generic version of phenytoin, a medication
used to control epileptic seizures.
    The generic version was found to be ineffective.  
"VA hospitals
have now substituted the brand name drug Dilantin, manufactured by
Parke-Davis, for the generic," said Gordon Sclar, a VA spokesperson in
Syracuse.
    FDA spokesman Edward Nida, who announced the recall last month, said that "Fourteen lots of the drug have been recalled because the drug, made by Sidmak Laboratories of East Hanover, N.J., was found to
dissolve too slowly in the bloodstream to be fully effective."
    The recall affected Verterans Administration hospitals across the
country that have been dispensing generic phenytoin for the past year.
"People who receive the low-potency drug may experience seizures,
because the drug was too weak to prevent them," Sclar said.
    The FDA notified VA hospitals by letter in December.  "As soon as
we received the Dilantin we sent it to the hundreds of patients who
were taking the generic.  We even sent the Dilantin to an individual
vacationing in Australia," Sclar said.
    FDA spokesman Nida said that he did not know whether the generic
phenytoin had been made available to other pharmacies in addition to
those run by the Veterans Administration.
CONTACT -- Sheila Marmion of Cohn & Wolfe, 212-951-8338, for
Parke-Davis

 

End of Document


DRUG FIRM RECALLING GENERIC ANTIBIOTIC
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 10, 1989, TUESDAY, THREE STAR Edition

 Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 10A
Length: 128 words
Body




NEW YORK (AP) - A drug company is recalling an antibiotic used to treat urinary tract infections after federal authorities accused the company of cheating on product safety tests.
The Food and Drug Administration, which requested the recall, contends that Bolar Pharmaceutical Co. Inc. of Copiague, N.Y. , cheated by using another company's version of the drug when it conducted tests required for the agency's approval.  Robert Shulman, president of the company, said in a statement Sunday that Bolar recalled its 100-milligram capsules of nitrofurantoin because of questions raised by the federal agency.  Bolar had been seeking approval for its generic version of nitrofurantoin.  The brand-name version is called Macrodantin and is made by Norwich-Eaton Pharmaceuticals.
 Load-Date: October 27, 1993

 

End of Document


Johnson and Johnson hit by drug recall
Financial Times (London,England)
April 29, 1983, Friday

 Copyright 1983 The Financial Times Limited
Section: SECTION I; Pg. 20
Length: 165 words
Byline: By Paul Taylor in New York
Body




JOHNSON and Johnson, the leading U.S. pharmaceutical group, said yesterday that its decision to withdraw its Zomax prescription pain killer from the market reduced net earnings by $20m in the first quarter.  The company added that loss of sales of the drug will continue to depress 1983 earnings.
The impact of the Zomax withdrawal, the second serious blow to the company in the last six months, had been forecast by the company which last year was forced to recall its big-selling Tylenol capsules from the U.S. market when seven residents in the Chicago area died after taking capsules laced with cyanide.
Johnson and Johnson withdrew Zomax last month after reports that five people had died after taking the drug.  The U.S. Food and Drug Administration is currently completing an evaluation of the drug, which had worldwide sales last year of about $82m.
The withdrawal of Zomax from the market accounted for almost all the drop in the company's first-quarter earnings.

 

End of Document


Heart drug recalled urgently over fault
The Advertiser
March 20, 1987 Friday

 Copyright 1987 Nationwide News Pty Limited
Length: 152 words
Body




A drug used in Australia to control irregular heartbeat has been urgently recalled by its maker because of suspicions that some batches may be faulty.
 The drug, Deralin, is made by the Brisbane company Alphapharm.
The chief pharmacist of the SA Health Commission, Mr Lloyd Davis, said heart patients should ask their doctors or chemists if their supplies of Deralin (generic name propranolol) came from batch number 8605007 (A, B, C, D or E).
 "We don't think it's being used very widely in SA hospitals because it is not on the Government contract," he said.
 He said the suspected batch would have a lower potency because it could not be adequately absorbed into the bloodstream.
 Deralin was "one of the original and more common of the heart drugs used" in Australia.
 In Australia, there are 20 brands closely related to the drug, and five brands of propranolol listed on the Federal Government pharmaceuticals list.
 Load-Date: September 19, 2003

 

End of Document


LAXATIVE WITHDRAWN BY FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION
PR Newswire
March 30, 1987, Monday

 COPYRIGHT 1987 PR Newswire Association, Inc.
Length: 206 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON, March 30
Body




WASHINGTON, March 30 /PRN/ -- The Food and Drug
Administration today advised drug firms manufacturing laxatives
containing the drug danthron to immediately discontinue their
production and to recall them from retail store shelves.
   This decision was based on recent studies showing that chronic
administration of high doses of danthron to rats and mice resulted in
the development of intestinal and liver tumors and that danthron is,
therefore, a potential cause of cancer in humans.
 Danthron toxicity in humans has not been specifically
demonstrated, the agency said, but because of the potential risk, FDA
has requested an immediate halt to all manufacturing, relabeling,
repackaging and further distribution of human drug products
containing danthron as an ingredient.
   A number of manufacturers of human drug products containing
danthron have already voluntarily agreed to remove their products
from the market, FDA said.
   All strengths and lots of laxatives containing danthron would be
included in the voluntary recall of products.  Drugs containing the
ingredient danthron are subject to regulatory action under the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.
CONTACT -- Edward Nida of the Food and Drug Administration,
301-443-3285 or, after hours, 301-831-8321

 

End of Document


American Home shuts generic plant - Correction Appended
USA TODAY

  Correction Appended
 Copyright 1989 Gannett Company Inc.
Section: MONEY; Pg. 3B; Spotlight
Length: 506 words
Byline: Tim Friend; Patrick Chu
Body




But Rep. John Dingell, D-Mich., chairman of the House subcommittee investigating the FDA and the generic-drug scandal, says an AHP official told his panel that operations were suspended ''because of serious discrepancies in abbreviated new drug applications.''
FDA spokesman Jeff Nesbit says investigators found discrepancies with approval applications for three unnamed Quantum drugs. ''In those three instances, some data appear to have been misrepresented to the agency during the approval process,'' he says.
The generic-drug industry was rattled last month when Dingell's panel and the FDA uncovered widespread fraud in approving generic drugs - low-cost versions of brand-name medicines.
The fraud allegations include bribery of FDA officials, falsification of test data and substituting the brand-name drug for generic samples in testing. Vitarine Pharmaceuticals and Par Pharmaceuticals have been hit with indictments, plant shutdowns and drug recalls. Bolar Pharmaceuticals, the largest generic-drug maker, has recalled some drugs.
Last week, drug giant Eli Lilly & Co. said it will shut down its brand-name drug plant in Indianapolis to correct quality control and record problems.
AHP's Emerling says the company intends to resume production of Quantum's 21 generic drugs as soon as possible, but wouldn't say when; 55 of the plant's 100 employees have been temporarily laid off. Neither AHP nor the FDA would identify Quantum's drugs, none of which are being recalled.
Analysts expect any effect on AHP or its stock to be more psychological than financial. Quantum, a private firm AHP bought in 1986 for an undisclosed sum to get a toe into the booming generic-drug business, accounts for an estimated $ 50 million, at most, of AHP's $ 5.8 billion in 1989 revenues.
AHP makes Advil, Anacin, Dristan, Primatine and other over-the-counter medicines; prescription drugs including the tranquilizer Ativan; and consumer products including Chef Boy-ar-dee, Jiffy Pop, Woolite, Black Flag and Easy-Off.
David Saks, senior vice president at Wedbush Morgan Securities Inc., says that at most, the news might pull the stock down 1/2 to a full point today.  ''It's more psychologically detrimental than numerical,'' Saks says. ''Psychologically, it's an embarrassment.''
 TEXT OF GRAPHIC Healthy growth
Amer. Home Prod.         '87      '88     '89 est.   '90 est
Revenues (billions)      $ 5.0     $ 5.5     $ 5.8      $ 6.2
Earnings (millions)      $ 845     $ 932     $ 1,044    $ 1,172
Earnings per share       $ 5.73    $ 6.38    $ 7.10     $ 7.97
Headquarters: New York        Employees: 44,200
Div./yld.: $ 3.90 / 3.9%       P-E: 15

Shares: 147.1 million
52-week high/low: $ 103 / $ 76 3/8        Wed. price: $ 100 3/8, + 1/4

Earnings estimates: analysts' consensus (Zacks Investment Research); revenues estimate: Value Line ; P-E based on trailing 12-mo. earnings
 Source: USA TODAY research
Correction



Bolar pharmaceuticals has not recalled any of its drugs.  The Food and Drug Administration has recommended withdrawing approval of Bolar's generic version of Dyazide. Bolar is fighting that recommendation.  Correction ran 9/22/89. Correction-Date: September 22, 1989
 Graphic



 
b/w, Source: USA TODAY research (Chart)

 

End of Document


Disputed Antibiotic Recalled
The New York Times
October 27, 1989, Friday, Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Page 6, Column 5; National Desk
Length: 336 words
Byline: By WARREN E. LEARYBy WARREN E. LEARY, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Oct. 26
Body




Because of new evidence of irregularities in testing, a major manufacturer of generic drugs has agreed to recall completely an antibiotic that it had previously withdrawn from the market only partly, the Food and Drug Administration said today.
The decision by the manufacturer, the Bolar Pharmaceutical Company of Copiague, L.I., follows its refusal earlier this month to comply with an F.D.A. request that it recall the disputed drug throughout its distribution chain to the pharmacy level.
Bolar had agreed to cease distribution of the product and withdraw it from distributors and wholesalers, but had said it did not feel the evidence warranted a total recall.
No adverse health effects have been reported in using the company's version of Macrodantin, generically known as nitrofurantoin, an antibiotic primarily used to treat urinary tract infections.
An F.D.A. spokesman said the 50-milligram and 100-milligram capsules are being recalled because of added evidence that Bolar substituted the brand name product in place of its own for tests required before the product was approved.
The agency said that because of possible substitution of one drug for another, it cannot assure that Bolar's product is biologically equivalent to the original brand name product made by Norwich Eaton Pharmaceuticals Action by Drug Agency William Grigg, an F.D.A. spokesman, said the agency was withdrawing the drug's approval application as announced previously and, in the meantime, downgrading its classification to one that alerts pharmacists that the F.D.A. no longer considers the drug interchangable with the name brand product.
Officers and other spokesmen for Bolar could not be reached for comment, and a person answering the company's switchboard said no one was available to answer questions.
The F.D.A. and the House Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, which are investigating quality problems involving the generic drug industry, also are looking into other allegations of product switching leveled against Bolar.

 

End of Document


NIPPON CHEMIPHAR UNDER HEAVY SELLING PRESSURE IN EARLY TSE TRADING
Copyright 1982 Jiji Press Ltd.Jiji Press Ticker Service
NOVEMBER 22, 1982, MONDAY

 Length: 207 words
Dateline: TOKYO, NOV. 22
Body




INVESTORS, ALARMED BY POSSIBLE CRIMINAL CHARGES AGAINST NIPPON CHEMIPHAR CO. FOR FILING FALSE CLINICAL DATA ON A NEW DRUG, WERE TRYING TO DUMP SHARES OF THE PHARMACEUTICAL FIRM ON THE TOKYO STOCK EXCHANGE MONDAY MORNING, BUT COULD NOT FIND ANY WILLING BUYERS.
SELL OFFERS AMOUNTED TO ONE MILLION SHARES AS OF EARLY MORNING WITH THE INDICATIVE PRICE TUMBLING 30 YEN FROM LAST WEEK'S CLOSE TO 1,820 YEN A SHARE, MARKET SOURCES SAID.
THE SOURCES SAID THE NIPPON CHEMIPHAR STOCK COULD GO DOWN TO A LIMIT LOSS OF 300 YEN DURING THE DAY AS THE PAIN-KILLING DRUG "NORVEDAN", PUT ON THE MARKET LAST FEBRUARY, HAD BEEN A MAJOR SOURCE OF REVENUES FOR THE COMPANY.
THE HEALTH AND WELFARE MINISTRY ORDERED NIPPON CHEMIPHAR TO RECALL THE DRUG FROM STORE SHELVES SATURDAY AND IS CONSIDERING FILING CRIMINAL CHARGES AGAINST THE COMPANY.
THE SELL-OFF OF NIPPON CHEMIPHAR SHARES ALSO BROUGHT DOWN PRICES OF OTHER PHARMACEUTICALS BY 10 TO 40 YEN, INCLUDING DAINIPPON PHARMACEUTICAL, CHUGAI PHARMACEUTICAL AND TANABE.
BUT ONE SECURITIES HOUSE SOURCE CALLED THE FALLOUT OF THE INCIDENT ONLY TRANSIENT, AND SAID THE MARKET CAN COUNT ON CONTINUED BUYING OF PHARMACEUTICALS BY FOREIGN INVESTORS ON THE STRENGTH OF THEIR HIGH LEVELS OF PROFITABILITY.

 

End of Document


LILLY RECALLS 10 PRODUCTS
Journal of Commerce

 Copyright 1989 The Journal of Commerce, Inc.
Section: CHEMICALS/PLASTICS, Pg. 7A
Length: 241 words
Byline: (AP)
Dateline: INDIANAPOLIS
Body




Eli Lilly & Co. says it has recalled batches of 10 prescription drugs and halted distribution from its plant here because of record-keeping violations found by federal inspectors.
 The pharmaceutical maker said it is confident there was nothing wrong with the safety or effectiveness of the drugs, which were recalled Tuesday from holesalers and had never reached pharmacies.
An inpection by the Food and Drug Administration last month found objectionable conditions in nearly every area of Lilly's Indianapolis capsule and tablet plant, including failure to have written standard operating procedures for many tasks and record-keeping problems.
"In nearly every system examined, the available data were found to be incomplete or inaccurately summarized," the FDA said. Results of that inspection were made public Tuesday.
In response, Lilly voluntarily recalled 18 batches of drugs and halted distribution of all products from the plant, which manufactures a relatively small amount of the company's capsules and tablets, said spokesman Ed West.
Distribution will resume when revised procedures have been established, probably within weeks, West said.
He said the recall and distribution shutdown would not affect availability of any major products, and the cost to the company was negligible.
Among the medicines recalled were Darvon, a pain reliever; Tapazole, a thyroid medication; Aventyl, an antidepressant, and Nalfon, an anti-inflammati on drug.
 Load-Date: December 19, 1996

 

End of Document


HEALTH: PRODUCT SAFETY; Mislabeled Poison Prompts Criticism Of Government's Recall Procedure
The New York Times
June 30, 1988, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

 Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 1288 words
Byline: By WARREN E. LEARY, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, June 29
Body




The discovery two months ago that bottles of a common medication contained poison instead of the drug triggered a nationwide recall procedure that continues today.
By now, many of the suspect bottles of ipecac syrup, used to induce vomiting for medical reasons, have been retrieved by the manufacturer and no poisonings are known to have occurred. The Food and Drug Administration says the recall has been relatively smooth and successful.
But critics of the nation's system for recalling defective or dangerous drugs, foods or medical devices say that the process has glaring flaws, illustrated in the case of the ipecac syrup. These critics say the system depends too much on voluntary efforts by companies, and it often takes too long.
Despite regulations, inspections and the best of intentions, potentially harmful products sometimes reach consumers. And with an economy geared toward distributing goods rather than retrieving them, who reaches into America's cupboards to recover a suspected item?
The F.D.A. presides over a system that allows producers and distributors largely to police themselves.
The agency says the system that allows industry to voluntarily recall and correct product deficiencies, sometimes under pressure from the Government, works well. Some critics, however, think a mandatory system in which the drug agency had more police powers would be better.
''Industry has been responsive and, by and large, the system has worked,'' said Dr. Frank E. Young, the F.D.A. Commissioner. ''There has not been one major case that I've been involved with in four years as Commissioner when industry did not take action when asked to take action. Because we regulate many products, companies want to keep a good reputation with the F.D.A. as well as the public.''
Dr. Young said the agency had not been reluctant to go to court to enforce regulations, including fowarding about 15 criminal actions annually to the Justice Department, as well as seeking about 20 injunctions and filing more than 200 seizure cases.
''If you didn't have the enforcement, a volunteer program wouldn't work,'' Dr. Young added. ''We are not afraid to call for enforcement if persuasion does not work.''
There are about 2,400 recalls of drugs, medical devices and foods, as classified by the agency, each year and at least 4,200 market withdrawals, the agency said. Market withdrawals involve corrections in products or their labels in which there is little hazard, such as orange juice discolored by over-pasteurization or a medical device that requires maintenance because a component wears out.
But the public does not hear about most of these actions. Fewer than a dozen of the recalls represent hazards so severe that the F.D.A. or the maker publicizes them to alert consumers immediately.
 
Humco Ipecac Syrup
The latest such action occurred April 29 when the agency announced a recall of up to 400,000 bottles of ipecac syrup made by Humco Laboratory of Texarkana, Tex. The syrup is used to induce vomiting in poisoning cases. Five bottles labeled as ipecac were found to contain pure eucalyptus oil, which even in small amounts can cause coma or death when swallowed.
The recall affects all one-ounce bottles of the Humco brand of ipecac. The company has since stopped selling ipecac syrup in that size bottle under the Humco name, so officials say any of these bottles found in homes, stores or other distribution channels are suspect and should be discarded or returned to the store. Other brands of ipecac are not covered by the recall.
Dissatisfied with initial publicity given to the recall, agency officials took the unusual step of issuing another alert on May 6 to encourage people to search medicine cabinets for the one-ounce bottles of Humco ipecac. The agency took the extra action when it learned that thousands of bottles had been distributed free to consumers as part of poison prevention campaigns.
More than 100,000 bottles have been accounted for, and the agency said it has received no reports of poisonings or death associated with the mislabeling. Many bottles of the inexpensive drug may have been discarded rather than returned by consumers alerted to the problem, officials said. Also, none of the bottles retrieved have been found to contain eucalyptus oil, and officials now believe that few of the total were improperly labeled.
 
Officials Satisfied With Recall
Agency officials consider the ipecac recall to be going well. But the critics think otherwise.
''Even if a recall like this is 100 percent complete eventually, people could be injured or die in the process,'' said Dr. Sidney Wolfe of the Health Research Group, a Washington-based advocacy group. ''Why rely on a procedure that repeatedly doesn't come close to being swift and complete. When you allow industry, at its own pace, to control a recall, you get a response like this with ipecac.''
While many Americans believe that the agency can order a hazardous food or drug off the market, it has never had this power. The agency can request that a manufacturer recall a harmful product, but it cannot mandate such action. If a business refuses, the agency must go to the courts.
''The problem with the system is that it is voluntary,'' said Bruce Silverglade, counsel for the Center for Science in the Public Interest, another Washington-based advocacy group that frequently addresses food and nutrition issues. ''There were efforts in Congress a few years ago to give it more authority, but nothing happened.''
Dr. Wolfe said: ''Voluntary recalls can be either slow or incomplete, leaving people exposed to dangerous drugs, devices or foods much longer than they should be. The whole idea of something being voluntary when the results can be death or serious problems is ridiculous.''
With stronger policing powers, the critics say, the drug agency could move more quickly to seize suspect stocks, put strict time limits on reporting progress of a recall and require disclosure of production and other information that could help in the action.
 
Guidelines Issued in 1978
Drug agency officials counter that the system works. The agency in 1978 issued guidelines for recalling defective products that detailed the responsibilities of the agency and industry. While the guidelines also called upon industry to notify the agency at the beginning of any recall, spokesmen said the drug agency sometimes does not hear about actions until they are completed, or perhaps never hears about them at all.
All recalls and similar actions that the drug agency or industry initiates are published each week in F.D.A. Enforcement, a report available from the Government Printing Office for $44 a year. The recalls are classified in three categories. Only the most serious, health-threatening recalls usually receive much public attention.
Class I recalls, the most serious, involve products that could cause serious health problems or death, such as the mislabeled eucalyptus oil. These recalls have also involved botulism toxin in foods, mislabeled drugs or defective artificial heart valves.
Class II recalls concern products that could cause temporary or reversible adverse reactions, such as a prescription drug that is weaker than it is supposed to be or foods that have too much of an added nutrient.
Class III actions involve products unlikely to involve adverse reactions, but which violate Federal regulations, such as having too few pills in a bottle or having a harmless ingredient that does not appear on a label.
The more serious the recall, the more the F.D.A. checks to make sure that all all proper outlets are notified. In Class I actions, the agency requires stringent reporting of the progress of the recall and sends agents into the field to monitor activities.
 Graphic



 
photo of Dr. Frank E. Young

 

End of Document


FLORIDA HRS SECRETARY COLER REQUESTS REMOVAL OF L-TRYPTOPHAN FROM SHELVES OF FLORIDA RETAILERS
PR Newswire
November 22, 1989, Wednesday

 Copyright 1989 PR Newswire Association, Inc.
Length: 415 words
Dateline: TALLAHASSEE, Fla., Nov. 22
Body




TALLAHASSEE, Fla., Nov. 22 /PRN/ -- Calling the federal
Food and Drug Administration's recall of the nutritional supplement
L-tryptophan a vital step to ensure the health and safety of all
citizens, the Department of Health and Rehabilitative Services
Secretary Gregory L. Coler today formally requested all Florida
retailers to remove the substance from their shelves.
    L-tryptophan, an amino acid sold in drug, grocery, department
and health food stores, has been found to cause a rare and harmful
blood disorder.
    Thus far, more than 30 Floridians, and a total of 300 people
nationwide, who used the amino acid, have been stricken with the
disease.  The Centers for Disease Control has reported one confirmed
death related to L-tryptophan in New York.
    "There is a virtually unequivocal link between consumption
of L-tryptophan supplements and the illness," said Coler.  "It
is vital that stores stop selling this product and that consumers
stop using it until further notice."
  The federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has ordered
the recall of the drug after finding that its use leads to
eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome, a rare blood disorder that can cause
severe muscle and joint pain, swelling of the arms and legs, skin
rash, fever, arthritis and numbness.
    Dr. Chalres S. Mahan, deputy secretary for health and state
health officer, said it is not yet known how L-tryptophan causes
the illness.
    "There is no single brand name product involved and officials
from the FDA are now studying every step in the production process
to determine why it causes the illness," Dr. Mahan said.  "HRS
epidemiologists are participating in a study of the amino acid
and those people it affects."
    HRS health officials will also work closely with the Food and Drug Administration to ensure a complete recall of L-tryptophan
from Florida retail outlets, as well as encourage Florida residents
to discard the nutritional supplement.
    Nov. 15, HRS issued an alert concerning the health effects
of L-tryptophan after four Florida cases were reported.  Since
that time, 30 additional cases have been reported, bringing Florida's
total to 34.  Also during that time, the FDA ordered the recall,
and the supplement's major distributor urged retailers to remove
the substance from their shelves.
    Doctors are asked to report cases related to L-tryptophan use
to the State Health Office in Tallahassee at 904-487-2705.
CONTACT -- Steve Konicki of the Florida Department of Health
and Rehabilitative Services, 904-488-4854

 

End of Document


GENERIC DRUGS GENERALLY SAFE; NO CAUSE FOR FEAR, SAYS FDA
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 17, 1989, SUNDAY, THREE STAR Edition

 Copyright 1989 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 11C
Length: 265 words
Body




WASHINGTON - The head of the federal Food and Drug Administration says that that generic drugs generally are safe and patients can continue taking them despite an industry scandal.  ''Recent events, unsettling though they may be, have not shaken our firm resolve that we can assure that generic drugs marketed in the United States are safe and effective,'' FDA Commissioner Frank E. Young said Thursday.
''If patients have been taking a generic drug with successful outcomes, there is no need to abandon the use of this medicine unless the physician recommends otherwise based on FDA's analysis of identified problems,'' he said in remarks for a meeting of the American Pharmaceutical Association.  A year-long investigation of the FDA and the generic drug industry found: testing fraud, manufacturing and paperwork irregularities and cash payoffs from drug companies to federal drug reviewers.  Recent FDA inspections found production and record-keeping problems at 11 of 13 generic drug firms chosen for the special review because of suspected problems, an agency official disclosed Monday.  But Young said the FDA had uncovered misconduct at only a small number of companies and had found problems with only a small number of products.  He added that the companies so far had voluntarily agreed to stop the distribution of or to recall questionable drugs.  ''Fortunately, our increased surveillance and inspections of generic drug firms - as well as our analysis of generic drugs themselves - have revealed no problems to date that would result in an imminent safety hazard,'' Young said.
 Load-Date: October 25, 1993

 

End of Document


FDA Says Firm Has Sold Unapproved Drug
The Associated Press
April 18, 1980, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1980 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 270 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Food and Drug Administration said today a New Jersey firm has marketed an unapproved generic version of a diuretic drug that could cause elevated potassium levels and endanger health.
The agency said Pharmadyne Laboratories of Elmwood Park, N.J., sold triamterine-hydrochlorothiazide -- its version of an approved drug called Dyazide -- without FDA approval for three weeks and has not agreed to recall it.
"Accordingly, FDA will request Pharmadyne's distributors to conduct the recall," it said.
Diuretics help eliminate fluids from the body and often are prescribed for patients with heart or kidney disease, cirrhosis of the liver or high blood pressure.
The FDA said Pharmadyne's generic drug may be absorbed more rapidly into the body than Dyazide and could raise potassium levels and lead to serious heart irregularities.
Bernard A. Bedrick, Pharmadyne's president, criticized the FDA announcement and said, "There is no way this drug could be a health hazard."
He said his firm had sent the FDA studies demonstrating its generic diuretic was "absolutely" equivalent to Dyazide and the FDA's recommended formula.
It is the second such warning from the FDA about an unapproved generic version of Dyazide.
Premo Laboratories of South Hackensack, N.J., was asked to recall its unapproved drug in February. The FDA said both Premo and Pharmadyne "are challenging FDA's authority to regulate certain drug products."
Both the approved and unapproved versions look alike. They are maroon and white. But the approved Dyazide carries the brand name and the letters SKF for its manufacturer, Smith Kline & French of Philadelphia.

 

End of Document


Cheating Scandal May Lead to Costlier Generics
The Associated Press
October 10, 1989, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 666 words
Byline: By DEBORAH MESCE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Consumers may soon be paying higher prices for prescription drugs as more generic products are pulled from the market and cost-conscious buyers are left with fewer low-priced options, some industry observers say.
Dozens of drugs have been recalled in the wake of allegations and admissions of cheating on safety tests required for Food and Drug Administration approval.
The scandal is likely to produce a shakeout in the industry and result in more rigorous safety testing required for approval. Some generic drug makers and industry observers say this will force prices up, but others say the industry will remain competitive enough to withstand the financial pressures without price increases.
A more immediate concern for consumers, however, is the possible effect of the recalls.
"The costs to pharmacists are going up for selected products, but not overall," said Steve Grote, vice president of purchasing for the American Association of Retired Persons Pharmacy Service.
The biggest impact of generic drug recalls may be seen by patients taking the high blood pressure drug Dyazide or its generic version.
One of the drug's two clones was removed from the market earlier this year when its maker, Vitarine Pharmaceutical Inc., admitted cheating on safety tests to win FDA approval. Now the FDA is trying to remove the other generic version from the market, saying its maker, Bolar Pharmaceutical Co. Inc., misrepresented test data to the agency.
Bolar's product is about half the price of Dyazide, and its removal from the market would mean higher prices for some consumers, at least until another generic version can win FDA approval.
Bolar agreed to recall another drug, an antibiotic used to treat urinary tract infections, after the FDA said the company cheated on product safety tests. The drug is nitrofurantoin, sold under the brand name Macrodantin by Norwich-Eaton Pharmaceuticals.
Generic drugs, which account for about one-third of all prescriptions nationwide, now offer consumers savings averaging 50 percent to 70 percent over their brand-name counterparts.
But some in the industry say the gap will narrow as the FDA toughens regulations and as the industry itself consolidates.
"The prices for generics will show a gradual increase … but still will be substantially below brand-name drugs," said John H. Klein, president of Zenith Laboratories in Northvale, N.J.
Klein, who with an investor group took the company out of bankruptcy last year and anticipates generic drug sales of $$36 million to $$40 million this year, also predicts an end to cutthroat pricing in the generic industry as companies realize that setting prices below costs to gain market share is unprofitable.
The FDA has no formal proposal for tougher regulations, but agency officials have been discussing the need for more staff, the possibility of imposing user fees on the generic industry for new drug application filings and more rigorous safety testing.
"All of those things will affect the cost of the generic drug," said Henry F. Blissenbach, director of pharmacy programs for United HealthCare Corp., a Minneapolis-based manager of health maintenance organizations.
But an official at Rugby Laboratories in Rockville Center, N.Y., disagrees.
Martin Zeiger, executive vice president and general counsel of Rugby, a privately held generic drug maker said to be the largest in the country with about $$500 million in annual sales, said the additional costs would not be enough to raise prices.
"It's a very competitive industry," he said. "We don't see the prices increasing at all."
Analysts anticipate some generic manufacturers will not make it through the scandal. Hemant K. Shah, a pharmaceutical analyst at HKS & Co., says more than half of the top 20 generic drug makers - who account for 90 percent of the generic business - will disappear within five years.
"But still the prices of generics probably are not going to rise because six or 10 companies are still enough for some form of pricing pressure," he said.

 

End of Document


FDA recalls laxative
United Press International
March 30, 1987, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1987 U.P.I.
Section: Washington News
Length: 235 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Food and Drug Administration warned Monday that laxatives containing the drug danthron may cause cancer and ordered an immediate halt to their production and retail sales.
FDA officials said recent studies found that when high doses of danthron were given to rats and mice, the rodents developed intestinal and liver tumors, leading to the conclusion that the drug is a potential cause of cancer in humans.
Edward Nida of the FDA said the affected laxatives are not the more popular ones seen in various advertisements.
''The laxatives are not household words. This is not the highly visible stuff you see on drugstore shelves,'' said Nida. ''It's a rather small percent of the market.''
Nida said that a subsidiary of the 3M Co. makes three laxative products containing the drug. He said he did not have information on other drug firms using danthron.
''Danthron toxicity in humans has not been specifically demonstrated, but because of the potential risk, FDA has requested an immediate halt to all manufacturing, relabeling, repackaging and further distribution of human drug products containing danthron as an ingredient,'' an FDA statement said.
FDA officials said that all strengths and lots of laxatives containing danthron would be included in the voluntary recall of products. Drugs containing the ingredient danthron are subject to regulatory action under the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act, officials said.

 

End of Document


Orphengesic, generic drug
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
July 28, 1989, Friday, City Edition

 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; RECALLS; Pg. 13A; DIGEST
Length: 234 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON; DETROIT
Body




WASHINGTON - A New York pharmaceutical company said Wednesday it will    recall a second generic drug because the firm may have misrepresented a    sample of the product to a Food and Drug Administration (FDA)    inspector. Par Pharmaceutical Inc. of Spring Valley, N.Y., has agreed    with an FDA request to recall its generic versions of Orphengesic, a    muscle relaxant, and Orphengesic Forte, the same drug in an    extra-strength formulation, said Barbara Manners, a Par vice president    and general counsel. 
The company said it "may have misrepresented" to    the inspector the size of the production batch from which the sample    was taken. On Monday, Par said it was voluntarily recalling its generic    version of the high-blood-pressure drug Maxzide after an internal    investigation found that product samples given to an FDA inspector were    "intentionally drawn from a production batch other than that    represented to the inspector." Manners said the company sees "no    immediate health or safety problems" with either the generic    Orphengesic drugs and the generic Maxzide.
 
 
 1989 Honda    motorcycles   
 
 DETROIT - American Honda Motor Co. Inc. said Wednesday that it was    voluntarily recalling 6,294 of its 1989 Honda CBR600F motorcycles to    eliminate a potential fire hazard. Dealers will reroute a fuel pump    breather tube at no cost to owners, American Honda said.
 
    
 Load-Date: November 9, 1992

 

End of Document


Drug Firm Recalls 50 Million Epilepsy Tablets
The Associated Press
September 21, 1988, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1988 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 158 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A Colorado drug manufacturer is recalling 50 million carbamazepine tablets for epilepsy treatment because they do not dissolve properly and thus may not be as effective as intended, the Food and Drug Administration said Wednesday.
The tablets are not harmful, but may not control or prevent seizures as well as they should, the agency said.
"I would advise patients to continue with their daily regimen of the tablets, which may be effective for most people, until they can be replaced," said FDA Commissioner Frank E. Young.
Patients will not be able to identify the recalled tablets themselves and should check with their pharmacies, the FDA said.
The 200-milligram tablets are round, white and marked on one side with one of three designations: 35/15, C66 or 832/G133.
Pharmacies can check with information supplied to them by the manufacturer, Pharmaceutical Basics Inc., of Denver, to determine whether particular tablets are among the recalled lots.

 

End of Document


THRIFT DRUG COMPANY ANNOUNCES RECALL
PR Newswire
April 29, 1988, Friday

 COPYRIGHT 1988 PR Newswire Association, Inc.
Length: 155 words
Dateline: PITTSBURGH, April 29
Body




PITTSBURGH, April 29 /PRN/ -- The FDA has issued a Class
One immediate nationwide recall on Humco Brand Ipecac Syrup which is
sold nationally in many retail outlets, Thrift Drug Co. said today.
   Thrift Drug has pulled Humco Brand Ipecac Syrup from all its
stores after discovering several suspicious bottles which Thrift
Drug then confirmed, through independent testing, contained Eucalyptus
Oil which can be highly toxic.
All consumers should check their
medicine cabinet for Humco Brand Ipecac Syrup which is commonly used
to induce vomitting in cases of poisoning.
   Humco Brand Ipecac Syrup should be returned to your place of
purchase. For more information, contact Thrift Drug Co. at
412-781-5373.
   Thrift Drug Co. operates under the name of Treasury Drug in
the following states: Florida, Georgia, Kansas, Kentucky,
Mississippi, Missouri, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, and
Virginia.
CONTACT -- Thrift Drug Co., 412-781-5373

 

End of Document


ZOMAX Returning To Drugstores 'Fairly Soon'
The Associated Press
March 12, 1983, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1983 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 513 words
Dateline: NEW BRUNSWICK, N.J.
Body




The prescription painkiller ZOMAX will be back on drugstore shelves "fairly soon," or after the U.S. Food and Drug Administration approves its new warning labels, according to officials at Johnson & Johnson.
Eight days ago, ZOMAX was pulled off the market for new labeling by its maker after reports of allergic reactions, including five deaths.
Officials at Johnson & Johnson, the parent company of McNeil Pharmaceutical, which manufactures the drug, announced Friday that the non-narcotic painkiller used by 15 million people before its recall will return, but could not predict exactly when.
"There have been people saying we're not coming back. … The point is we're going to bring it back and fairly soon," said James A. Murray, a company spokesman.
Murray said the drug, which was recalled voluntarily, will be available in drugstores as soon as the company repackages it with new inserts warning certain patients not to use it.
The deaths of five people in the past year in Massachusetts, Kansas, North Dakota and New York were attributed to severe allergic reactions to ZOMAX, Murray said. About 1,000 cases of allergic reactions ranging from mild to severe have been reported.
Two of the people who died were sensitive to aspirin, and a package insert warned such people not to use the product, the company said.
On March 4, Johnson & Johnson announced it was withdrawing ZOMAX until a new label spelling out possible side effects could be issued in consultation with the FDA. The FDA did not request the recall and said the drug would not have to be taken off the market permanently.
The review process is well under way and McNeil expects to make ZOMAX available with revised labeling in a matter of weeks, Murray said.
"Final wording of the labeling is not yet available but will be sent to physicians before the product is remarketed. The anticipated changes in the prescribing information will emphasize warnings regarding allergic reactions and will redefine the patient population for which the product is indicated for use," Murray said.
Johnson & Johnson estimated that the withdrawal of the popular drug would cost the company $40 million before taxes and reduce after-tax earnings by $20 million, Murray said.
The ZOMAX recall was the second financial blow in six months to Johnson & Johnson, the largest pharmaceutical company in the United States. The company's McNeil Consumer Products Co. makes the non-prescription pain reliever Tylenol. Seven people in the Chicago area died after taking cyanide-laced Extra-Strength Tylenol capsules in September and October. The tamperer has not been caught.
Expenses associated with the temporary recall and repackaging of Tylenol were about $100 million, the company said.
ZOMAX had been prescribed to 15 million people since it appeared on the market in October 1980, the company said. Sales of ZOMAX in the United States and about 25 nations abroad _ including countries in Europe, South America and Asia _ were $82 million last year.
The company asked consumers to stop taking the drug and to return it to drugstores for a refund.

 

End of Document


DOUBTS ON DRUG TESTS - BLEWETT
COURIER-MAIL
January 28, 1987 Wednesday

 Copyright 1987 Nationwide News Pty Limited
Length: 408 words
Byline: AAPAUSNEWS
Body




CORRECTION Doubts on drug tests - Blewett SYDNEY._ Medical authorities have serious doubts about some brands of drugs used to treat heart diseases, diabetes, high blood pressure, tuberculosis and malaria. However, the drugs are not being withdrawn from sale, despite an admission that there is ""a degree of risk" in their use for some major illnesses. The Federal Health Minister, Dr Blewett, said yesterday doctors were being warned to monitor patients using 33 specific brands of drugs because there were serious doubts about the prescribed dosage levels. Doctors also were being warned to stop prescribing the drugs to new patients, he said. The Australian Drug Evaluation Committee chairman, Professor Mervyn Eadie, said some patients who used the drugs were suffering life-threatening illnesses. There was a degree of risk in continued use while there were doubts about the proper doses but there could be greater risks in prescribing other brands for some patients. Dr Blewett said there was no concern about the chemical make up of the drugs but about the rate at and extent to which they entered the bloodstream. The drugs were tested by South African laboratory Gestalt Pty Ltd but the drug evaluation committee now had serious doubts about the way the tests were done. Dr Blewett said there were no reports of patients reacting adversely to the brands but the Government had accepted a recommendation by the committee that more tests should be carried out. The warning applies to: Amizide, capitol, Cardinol, Corbeton, Dimal, Inflam, Lorizide and Presolol tablets (used to treat high blood pressure); Anpine capsules (heart disease), Diatol tablets (diabetes); Uremide, Urid tablets (diuresis); Thioprine (transplants and rheumatoid arthritis); Quinsul tablets (malaria and heart disease), and Rimycin capsules (tuberculosis).
QNPIt also applies to Alepam, Alodorm, Alprim, Antenex, Benzotran, Dipramol, Grisfulvin, Hypnodorm, Kauril, Naxen, Nortrip, Pacedol, Spirotone, Sulazine, Trichozole, and Urimor tablets, and Arthrexin and Temazin capsules _ all used to treat less serious illnesses. The brands are made in Australia by the Alphapharm and Protea pharmaceutical companies. The Australian Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association strongly criticised the Government's decision not to recall the drugs. Protea Pharmaceuticals also criticised the Government, saying there would be needless public concern about products which were safe.
 Load-Date: September 19, 2003

 

End of Document


scientific progress to change u.s. life in decades
The Xinhua General Overseas News ServiceXinhua General News Service
NOVEMBER 3, 1988, THURSDAY

 Length: 295 words
Dateline: new york, november 3
Body




scientific, tecnological and social advances will change the way americans live in the 21st century, according to a special report released by the world future society available here today.
advances being made in the fields of medical, high technology, and genetic engineering are changing the course of human history, said futurists marvin j. cetron, wanda rocha, and rebecca lucken in their report on the long-term trends affecting the united states.
of the 71 trends that, in the view of the futurists, need to be taken into account when planning for the future, the major ones include the following:
--by the year 2001, artificial intelligence will be almost universally used by companies and government agencies to help assimilate data and solve problems.
about half of all service workers will be involved in collecting, analyzing, synthesizing, structuring, storing, or retrieving information as a basis of knowledge by the year 2000.  half of those will be working at home.
--superconductors operating at room temperature will be in commercial use by 2001, as will superconductors the size of a three-pound coffee can, electric motors 75 percent smaller and lighter than those of today, and 200-mile-per-hour trains that float on magnetic cushions.
--100 billion dollars will be spent on genetic engineering by the year 2000 on such things as artificial blood, memory-recall drugs, and disease immunities for newborns.
--aids will run so rampant that every u.s. taxpayer will be paying 500 dollars a year to care for aids patients in the year 2000.
the report also cautions that education in the united states must improve in order to keep up with technological advances and to compete in the increasingly global and competitive economy.

 

End of Document


Widow of drug firm's founder recalls its depression start; 'We still have some of the same customers'
United Press International
June 10, 1982, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1982 U.P.I.
Section: Domestic News
Length: 482 words
Byline: By CATHY LEWANDOWSKI
Dateline: CHICAGO
Body




Fifty years ago, at the height of the Depression, Louis Zahn borrowed $1,000, bought a van and started his own drug company.
The times -- and the work -- were hard. But Zahn's drug company grew. It became one of the largest pharmaceutical suppliers in the Midwest.
Now his widow is searching for the customer who gave Zahn his first dollar in receipts. She plans to repay him with four 1932 silver quarters worth about $64 each.
''It doesn't seem like 50 years though, not at all. It's just like yesterday,'' said Frieda Zahn in an interview.
Opening a business in the '30s was hard but Zahn was the kind of man who could make his dream work while banks closed and other business folded, Mrs. Zahn said.
''It was kind of difficult. I never saw my husband -- he was out on the road all the time. He used to put in 14, 16, 18 hours until he got started. He was determined. He was that kind of man.
''It was hard work but we took every piece by piece as you go along in life and he became the success he was. He was terrific. He was very choosey at the time he started. He always booked very good accounts -- we still have some of the same customers.''
So far, that first customer who bought sundries out of the back of Zahn's van has not turned up. But Mrs. Zahn is certain he will.
To track down the first customers, the Zahn Co. sent letters to all of the customers on its rolls and Mrs. Zahn is searching her memory.
''It's been a long time and an awful lot of them are gone but I think they will find someone,'' she said.
She told of the early days of the company -- and the Zahns' marriage.
''We were going together. He just borrowed some money and bought himself a truck. He was very fortunate -- he had a man who carried the Gillette line and he carried him on credit.
''He worked out of his mother's and father's basement -- and that's how it got started. Then we hired a driver and it just kept on growing.
''In 1934, we moved out of that basement -- I was married that year. It was fun and we worked hard and we enjoyed it. And he had a marvelous sense of humor.
''The banks all started closing just before we got married. Seven banks closed. And I thought this would be our turning point when we got married...And we didn't have much merchandise. So my husband said, 'Well, we'll put up large boxes and people will think there's a lot of merchandise in them.' We did that, oh sure we did.''
 ''At that time everything was on the sundry lines, like beauty, health, razor blades, and we never carried the pharmaceuticals like we do today.''
In 1963, the Zahn Co. moved to its facility in Melrose Park and the business changed as locations did.
''...Today we carry everything. Thirty-some-odd-thousand items and most of them -- 60 percent -- are pharmaceuticals.''
''It was fun -- all I can say is it was fun. He always used to say it was much more fun when we were starting out than when we got bigger.''

 

End of Document


FDA Chief Says Agency Needs More Power to Punish Cheating on Drug Tests
The Associated Press
November 17, 1989, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 747 words
Byline: By DEBORAH MESCE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Food and Drug Administration chief told Congress on Friday the agency needs more authority to punish generic drug companies that cheat on safety tests and misrepresent data to win product approvals.
FDA Commissioner Frank Young also gave a qualified endorsement to generic drugs, saying the agency's investigation of the 30 top-selling generics provides "good assurances" about their overall safety.
"Are the generic drugs on the market safe and effective? The answer appears to be a qualified yes … our job is not done though, and we will keep that qualification until we are done," Young told a House subcommittee.
He added: "Patients using generic drugs should continue using them."
Young, testifying before the Energy and Commerce investigations subcommittee, said he will work with lawmakers to beef up FDA's ability to remove problem generics from the market quicker and to take stronger action against the companies that violate FDA rules.
He noted that problems have been found with certain manufacturers, including several that switched their products for brand-name drugs in tests required to win FDA approval.
So far, he said, none of these cases, nor instances of company executives attempting to bribe FDA employees, have compromised the safety of any generic drugs that were sold to the public.
As a result of the FDA's investigation, generic drug companies have recalled a total of 83 drugs because of problems ranging from manufacturing deficiencies to cheating on safety tests.
In addition, the FDA has started the lengthy process of withdrawing drug approvals for five generic drug makers.
The FDA began investigating after the subcommittee turned up evidence of fraud. So far three former FDA employees have been convicted of receiving illegal gratuities and three generic drug manufacturing executives have been convicted on bribery charges. The investigations by FDA, the subcommittee and the U.S. attorney's office are continuing and more charges are expected.
The FDA does not have broad authority to recall drugs. In most cases, the agency relies on companies to comply with FDA requests for recalls.
Several subcommittee members brought up the possibility of giving FDA authority to bar future drug approvals from companies that are shown to have committed criminal acts to win previous approvals.
Asked if he felt FDA needed that authority, Young said, "I absolutely do."
Young is leaving after more than five years as head of the FDA next month to take another position within the Public Health Service, which is part of the Department of Health and Human Services.
In an interview during a break in the hearing, Young denied speculation that he is being forced out because of the generic drug scandal.
"If I left last March, they would say it was because of the Chilean grapes," imports of which were halted temporarily after a poisoning threat, he said. "If I leave now, it's the generic drugs.
"There's always some problem at FDA," he said, adding that "there's no way to dismount from the tiger" without stirring speculation.
At the hearing, Rep. John Dingell, D-Mich., subcommittee chairman, praised Young's efforts to clean house at the FDA, and warned the generic drug industry that, although Young is leaving, the subcommittee will continue its investigation and "will make sure that a flood light is in place."
An interim report on the FDA's investigation into generic drugs submitted to the subcommittee said that among 11 generic drug firms suspected of wrongdoing, inspections found problems at nine of the companies, including fraudulent drug approval applications, "cutting corners" in the manufacturing process and other manufacturing deficiencies.
The FDA wants to withdraw drug approvals for four of those companies - Bolar Pharmaceuticals of Copiague, N.Y.; Par Pharmaceuticals of Spring Valley, N.Y.; Superpharm Corp. of Central Islip, N.Y.; and Vitarine Pharmaceuticals of Springfield Gardens, N.Y.
Among 20 other companies inspected later, one firm, Quantum Pharmics of Amityville, N.Y., was found to have falsified records for a number of its products and manufacturing deficiencies were found at other companies. The FDA wants to withdraw drug approvals for 11 Quantum products.
Tests on more than 2,500 samples of the 30 top-selling generic drugs are nearly complete and so far have found that nearly 99 percent of the drugs sampled comply with FDA standards.
Young said this is consistent with the rates routinely found for brand-name and generic drugs.

 

End of Document


FDA Chief Says Agency Needs More Power to Punish Cheating on Drug Tests
The Associated Press
November 17, 1989, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 747 words
Byline: By DEBORAH MESCE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Food and Drug Administration chief told Congress on Friday the agency needs more authority to punish generic drug companies that cheat on safety tests and misrepresent data to win product approvals.
FDA Commissioner Frank Young also gave a qualified endorsement to generic drugs, saying the agency's investigation of the 30 top-selling generics provides "good assurances" about their overall safety.
"Are the generic drugs on the market safe and effective? The answer appears to be a qualified yes … our job is not done though, and we will keep that qualification until we are done," Young told a House subcommittee.
He added: "Patients using generic drugs should continue using them."
Young, testifying before the Energy and Commerce investigations subcommittee, said he will work with lawmakers to beef up FDA's ability to remove problem generics from the market quicker and to take stronger action against the companies that violate FDA rules.
He noted that problems have been found with certain manufacturers, including several that switched their products for brand-name drugs in tests required to win FDA approval.
So far, he said, none of these cases, nor instances of company executives attempting to bribe FDA employees, have compromised the safety of any generic drugs that were sold to the public.
As a result of the FDA's investigation, generic drug companies have recalled a total of 83 drugs because of problems ranging from manufacturing deficiencies to cheating on safety tests.
In addition, the FDA has started the lengthy process of withdrawing drug approvals for five generic drug makers.
The FDA began investigating after the subcommittee turned up evidence of fraud. So far three former FDA employees have been convicted of receiving illegal gratuities and three generic drug manufacturing executives have been convicted on bribery charges. The investigations by FDA, the subcommittee and the U.S. attorney's office are continuing and more charges are expected.
The FDA does not have broad authority to recall drugs. In most cases, the agency relies on companies to comply with FDA requests for recalls.
Several subcommittee members brought up the possibility of giving FDA authority to bar future drug approvals from companies that are shown to have committed criminal acts to win previous approvals.
Asked if he felt FDA needed that authority, Young said, "I absolutely do."
Young is leaving after more than five years as head of the FDA next month to take another position within the Public Health Service, which is part of the Department of Health and Human Services.
In an interview during a break in the hearing, Young denied speculation that he is being forced out because of the generic drug scandal.
"If I left last March, they would say it was because of the Chilean grapes," imports of which were halted temporarily after a poisoning threat, he said. "If I leave now, it's the generic drugs.
"There's always some problem at FDA," he said, adding that "there's no way to dismount from the tiger" without stirring speculation.
At the hearing, Rep. John Dingell, D-Mich., subcommittee chairman, praised Young's efforts to clean house at the FDA, and warned the generic drug industry that, although Young is leaving, the subcommittee will continue its investigation and "will make sure that a flood light is in place."
An interim report on the FDA's investigation into generic drugs submitted to the subcommittee said that among 11 generic drug firms suspected of wrongdoing, inspections found problems at nine of the companies, including fraudulent drug approval applications, "cutting corners" in the manufacturing process and other manufacturing deficiencies.
The FDA wants to withdraw drug approvals for four of those companies - Bolar Pharmaceuticals of Copiague, N.Y.; Par Pharmaceuticals of Spring Valley, N.Y.; Superpharm Corp. of Central Islip, N.Y.; and Vitarine Pharmaceuticals of Springfield Gardens, N.Y.
Among 20 other companies inspected later, one firm, Quantum Pharmics of Amityville, N.Y., was found to have falsified records for a number of its products and manufacturing deficiencies were found at other companies. The FDA wants to withdraw drug approvals for 11 Quantum products.
Tests on more than 2,500 samples of the 30 top-selling generic drugs are nearly complete and so far have found that nearly 99 percent of the drugs sampled comply with FDA standards.
Young said this is consistent with the rates routinely found for brand-name and generic drugs.

 

End of Document


Critics attack supply of 'banned' drugs
The Advertiser
January 29, 1987 Thursday

 Copyright 1987 Nationwide News Pty Limited
Length: 311 words
Body




CANBERRA - The Government has been criticised for allowing continued distribution of 33 drugs which have been the subject of a Department of Health enquiry.
 Prescriptions for the generic drugs to new patients were banned by the Government on Tuesday after the enquiry found that data from South African tests was unreliable.
 But the Government refused to withdraw the drugs from the market saying patients already on them would suffer without them.
aap
Both the Opposition and the Australian Pharmaceutical Manufacturers' Association yesterday strongly criticised the Government's handling of the issue.
 The Opposition spokesman on health, Mr Porter, said the Government should explain why it allowed the drugs to be used for two years after it had received critical reports on them. He said the Government had been involved in a cover-up and it was time an independent review of the approval process for generic drugs was set up.
 The APMA chief executive, Mr Kerry Bell, accused the department of inconsistency in its treatment of generic drugs. He said the cheaper generic drugs were not subject to the rigorous evaluation which patent drugs were by the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee.
 The Minister for Health, Dr Blewett, defended the decision not to recall the drugs, saying he had the support of expert medical and scientific advice.
 Dr Blewett said he had considered withdrawing the drugs but medical experts were of the opinion that the safety of patients already stabilised on these drugs would be best served by leaving them on the market.
 The drugs under scrutiny include antibiotics, painkillers, tranquillisers and tablets for diabetes, high blood pressure and angina.
 Dr Blewett said the drugs would continue to be provided to patients already using them.
 But, he said, no new patients should be started on treatment with any of the 33 drugs in question.
 Load-Date: September 19, 2003

 

End of Document


Contac to make comeback
United Press International
April 9, 1986, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1986 U.P.I.
Section: Domestic News
Length: 255 words
Dateline: PHILADELPHIA
Body




Contac, the popular cold remedy pulled from store shelves last month because some capsules were contaminated with rat poison will be reintroduced before the fall, the manufacturer announced Tuesday.
''We're making a great deal of progress evaluating various dosage forms, advances in manufacturing, and tamper-evident packaging,'' said Sharyn Arnold, a spokeswoman for SmithKline Beckman Corp. ''We expect to announce our plans in mid-May.''
The pharmaceutical company announced Contac would be put back on the market before the cold and allergy season this fall.
Arnold said the firm had not made a firm decision on whether it would market the drug in capsule form again. SmithKline also plans to reintroduce Teldrin, an allergy medicine that also was contaminated by rat poison, she said.
The firm decided not to reintroduce a third over-the-counter product recalled because of the tampering scare, the diet suppressant Dietac, Arnold said.
SmithKline recalled the three drugs March 21 after a man who identified himself only as ''Gary'' phoned the company and various media outlets to say he had poisoned Contac, Dietac and Teldrin in four U.S. cities. A total of nine Contac and Teldrin capsules contaminated with small amounts of rat poison were discovered.
Arnold said the firm has not heard from Gary recently and did not know how the FBI investigation was proceeding. ''We've not heard anything of the FBI investigation,'' she said. ''We have not gotten any more information.''
SmithKline has said the recall could cost $8 million.

 

End of Document


Feds Criticize Heart Pacemaker Recall
The Associated Press
August 6, 1987, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1987 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 342 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Food and Drug Administration should have acted more quickly to remove a defective Medtronic Inc. heart pacemaker from the market in 1984, according to a federal inspector general.
The criticism was contained in a report released this week by the inspector general's office of the Department of Health and Human Services.
The office spent a year investigating complaints that the FDA mishandled the case, which involved one model of the company's pacemaker leads, or connecting wires.
Although the investigation focused on the pacemaker recall, the underlying aim was to use that case to examine FDA recall procedures in general, particularly regarding so-called medical devices.
The basic facts of the pacemaker case were aired during congressional hearings in 1984.
The inspector general's report criticized the FDA for permitting a limited, rather than total, recall of the device, which it said posed a potential health hazard to patients. It also urged the agency to make changes to avoid making in the future what it judged to be mistakes in the pacemaker recall.
In a summary of the report, the inspector general's office said that since the recall now is essentially complete it is "not making any recommendations relative to this particular recall."
The report noted that the FDA has followed its recommendation to form a task force "to clarify or otherwise strengthen its procedures on product recalls by incorporating into these procedures the lessons learned from the Model 6972 lead recall."
Under the limited recall, Medtronic stopped selling the defective lead, known as Model 6972, but failed to recall those already in customer inventories. As a result, an undetermined number of the defective models remained available for implant for an additional four months until Medtronic, based in Fridley, Minn., voluntarily recalled them.
The report said the FDA should have requested a total recall right away because the defective leads could have caused serious injury or even death. Medtronic has said no such injuries or deaths have been reported.

 

End of Document


Feds Criticize Heart Pacemaker Recall
The Associated Press
August 6, 1987, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1987 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 342 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Food and Drug Administration should have acted more quickly to remove a defective Medtronic Inc. heart pacemaker from the market in 1984, according to a federal inspector general.
The criticism was contained in a report released this week by the inspector general's office of the Department of Health and Human Services.
The office spent a year investigating complaints that the FDA mishandled the case, which involved one model of the company's pacemaker leads, or connecting wires.
Although the investigation focused on the pacemaker recall, the underlying aim was to use that case to examine FDA recall procedures in general, particularly regarding so-called medical devices.
The basic facts of the pacemaker case were aired during congressional hearings in 1984.
The inspector general's report criticized the FDA for permitting a limited, rather than total, recall of the device, which it said posed a potential health hazard to patients. It also urged the agency to make changes to avoid making in the future what it judged to be mistakes in the pacemaker recall.
In a summary of the report, the inspector general's office said that since the recall now is essentially complete it is "not making any recommendations relative to this particular recall."
The report noted that the FDA has followed its recommendation to form a task force "to clarify or otherwise strengthen its procedures on product recalls by incorporating into these procedures the lessons learned from the Model 6972 lead recall."
Under the limited recall, Medtronic stopped selling the defective lead, known as Model 6972, but failed to recall those already in customer inventories. As a result, an undetermined number of the defective models remained available for implant for an additional four months until Medtronic, based in Fridley, Minn., voluntarily recalled them.
The report said the FDA should have requested a total recall right away because the defective leads could have caused serious injury or even death. Medtronic has said no such injuries or deaths have been reported.

 

End of Document


Infant formula rules issued
United Press International
April 5, 1982, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1982 U.P.I.
Section: Washington News
Length: 266 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The government issued rules Monday requiring every batch of infant formula to include nutrients essential to keep babies healthy.
Issuance of the rules follows by one month a massive recall of formula that lacked vitamin B-6.
A lack of vitamin B-6 can cause serious health problems in children.
At the time of last month's recall the Food and Drug Administration told a congressional hearing the problem could have been averted if quality control and testing regulations, first proposed in 1980, had been in effect.
The regulations were proposed following another recall three years ago. But the rules underwent revisions in the change of administrations and were not issued in final form until Monday.
Health and Human Services Secretary Richard Schweiker said the new regulations ''will help ensure that these products, which are often the sole source of food for infants, contain all the nutrients essential for their normal growth and development.''
In addition to requiring that every batch of formula be tested for nutrient content before shipping, the rules require manufacturers to start quality control systems for their manufacturing processes, keep samples of finished products on hand throughout their shelf life and code each product to tell where and when it was packed.
Under the rules, manufacturers also are obligated to notify fhe FDA ''when they have reason to believe their products may be deficient in the required nutients,'' the announcement said.
The regulations go into effect 90 days after publication in the Federal Register. The FDA said the publication date is expected ''soon.''

 

End of Document


Potassium Chloride Recalled
The Associated Press
June 4, 1980, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1980 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 266 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Food and Drug Administration said Wednesday a California firm is recalling from Veterans Administration hospitals and clinics 5,052 bottles of potassium chloride that may be mislabeled.
The 16-ounce bottles contain Whiteworth Potassium Chloride Solution 20 percent, but some were mislabeled 10 percent.
Whiteworth Inc. of Cardina, Calif., made the solution and distributed it to the VA supply depot in Broadview, Ill., which sent them on to 26 VA clinics and hospitals around the country, FDA spokeswoman Faye Peterson said. The mislabeling was spotted by a Texas hospital and the firm began the recall April 22, she said.
The firm's director of quality control, Michael Gnekow, said 3,900 bottles have been recovered so far and only 39 actually mislabeled.
All the bottles were in cartons correctly labeled. They carry the code lot number A586212.
The FDA spokeswoman said patients taking diuretics and other drugs that deplete potassium are given the solution. Most would not be harmed by taking a 20 percent solution instead of ten percent, but it could cause serious problems for those with renal failure or some other conditions, she said.
In another recall notice, the FDA said the Physio Control Corp. of Redmond, Wash., is recalling 5,600 "Lifepak 6" Defibrillators, portable cardiac care systems, because of circuitry problems. It said the Piggyback Patient Monitor used with the Lifepak 6 is not being recalled.
This recall involved all serial numbers on the Defibrillators shipped before April 1. The basic serial number is 800260-00, but the FIA said the last two or three digits may vary.

 

End of Document


Potassium Chloride Recalled
The Associated Press
June 4, 1980, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1980 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 268 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Food and Drug Administration said Wednesday a California company is recalling from Veterans Administration hospitals and clinics 5,052 bottles of potassium chloride that may be mislabeled.
The 16-ounce bottles contain Whiteworth Potassium Chloride Solution 20 percent, but some were mislabeled 10 percent.
Whiteworth Inc. of Cardina, Calif., made the solution and distributed it to the VA supply depot in Broadview, Ill., which sent the bottles to 26 VA clinics and hospitals around the country, FDA spokeswoman Faye Peterson said. The mislabeling was spotted by a Texas hospital and the company began the recall April 22, she said.
The firm's director of quality control, Michael Gnekow, said 3,900 bottles have been recovered so far and only 39 actually mislabeled.
All the bottles were in cartons correctly labeled. They carry the code lot number A586212.
The FDA spokeswoman said patients taking diuretics and other drugs that deplete potassium are given the solution. Most would not be harmed by taking a 20 percent solution instead of ten percent, but it could cause serious problems for those with renal failure or some other conditions, she said.
In another recall notice, the FDA said the Physio Control Corp. of Redmond, Wash., is recalling 5,600 "Lifepak 6" Defibrillators, portable cardiac care systems, because of circuitry problems. It said the Piggyback Patient Monitor used with the Lifepak 6 is not being recalled.
This recall involved all serial numbers on the Defibrillators shipped before April 1. The basic serial number is 800260-00, but the FIA said the last two or three digits may vary.

 

End of Document


Company to Pull Acidic Heart Drug Off Market
The Associated Press
January 25, 1983, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1983 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 292 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The maker of epinephrine has agreed to remove older batches of the cardiac arrest drug from the market because it may be too acidic, the Food and Drug Administration says.
Monday's announcement from the FDA said Abbott Laboratories will recall batches of the drug, sold in 10 millileter Abboject brand syringes with intra-cardiac needles, that were manufactured before July 1982.
The drug is used in cases where a patient's heart has stopped.
Two physicians reported in the January issue of the American Journal of Medicine that they had found high acid levels in two heart patients who died after they were treated with epinephrine.
When the heart stops, it becomes more acidic and the doctors speculated that extra acid in the drug might contribute to deaths it is supposed to prevent.
After that report appeared, the FDA asked physicians and emergency health personnel to use caution in administering doses of epinephrine carrying the codes 44-145-DK or lower.
FDA officials met with company representatives Monday and asked that the older lots be withdrawn voluntarily, FDA spokesman Bill Grigg said, adding that an agency review of whether the suspect batches of epinephrine were too acidic was inconclusive.
"FDA and Abbott agreed today that a risk really can't be assessed," Grigg said. The product is being withdrawn "because of the theoretical possibility that the higher acid might add a burden to the heart," he added.
The company changed the formulation of epinephrine last July to make it less acidic. But even the older batches of the drug meet the official acid standard set by U.S. Pharmacopeia.
Abbott Laboratories is based in North Chicago, Ill.
Grigg said there is no estimate of how much epinephrine with the specific code numbers is still in use.

 

End of Document


Tampering suspect says reward too low
United Press International
March 25, 1986, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1986 U.P.I.
Section: Domestic News
Length: 481 words
Byline: By MICHELE DIGIROLAMO
Dateline: PHILADELPHIA
Body




A $900,000 reward has been offered to help catch the person who poisoned three non-prescription medicines, but a caller claiming to be the chief suspect in the case says it is ''not enough.''
The man identifying himself only as ''Gary'' telephoned WCAU-TV in Philadelphia Monday and said, ''Your $900,000 isn't enough. I'll take more,'' according to Martin Blair, director of press relations for the CBS affiliate.
SmithKline Beckman Corp., a Philadelphia-based pharmaceutical firm, recalled Contac, Teldrin and Dietac last week after small amounts of rat poison were found in nine capsules of the medications in Houston and Orlando, Fla.
The discovery of the rat killer followed calls from a man named ''Gary'' who told news organizations and the company he had poisoned the over-the-counter drugs in Orlando, Fla., Houston, St. Louis and Chicago.
The caller to WCAU was apparently referring to $700,000 in reward money made available Monday by the Proprietary Association, a Washington-based trade group for non-prescription drug makers, and $200,000 offered by Johnson & Johnson, the maker of Tylenol.
The trade group and Johnson & Johnson are seeking information that will lead to the arrest and conviction of the person or persons responsible for the latest tampering incidents as well as those in which eight people died after taking cyanide-laced Extra-Strength Tylenol capsules.
''The industry is more and more outraged at hearing of additional episodes of tampering and feels that the best thing that we can do is to bring the criminals to justice,'' association spokeswoman Mary Simons said.
It was not clear if the ''Gary'' who called the television station was the same person who phoned SmithKline Thursday. Blair said the station reported Monday's call to the FBI.
FBI spokesman Lane Bonner refused to comment on the latest development, saying only the investigation was continuing. But SmithKline spokesman Jeremy Heymsfeld said he thought the call to WCAU was the first that ''Gary'' had made since he contacted the company.
SmithKline said the recall of Contac, a cold medicine, Teldrin, an allergy remedy, and Dietac, an appetite suppressant, could cost $8 million, which will be charged against its first quarter 1986 profits. The firm declined to estimate what those profits would be.
Combined sales of the three recalled drugs made up less than 3 percent of SmithKline's 1985 profits of $514.4 million, a spokesman said.
The SmithKline tamperings came a little more than a month after Diane Elsroth, 23, of Peekskill, N.Y., was killed by a Tylenol capsule laced with cyanide. In 1982, seven people died in the Chicago area after taking cyanide-laced Tylenol.
On Feb. 17, following Elsroth's death, Johnson & Johnson announced it would stop marketing over-the-counter drugs in capsules.
SmithKline said it planned to eventually reintroduce its products, but did not know in what form.

 

End of Document


DRUG MAKERS ARE USING BAD HABITS
SUNDAY MAIL (QLD)
May 22, 1988 Sunday

 Copyright 1988 Nationwide News Pty Limited
Length: 366 words
Byline: CUMMING F
Body




Drug makers are using bad habits By FIA CUMMING SOME drug companies in Australia are regularly breaking quality control and manufacturing standards, putting consumers at risk.
But the breaches have been ignored by state and territory governments because their licensing laws are inadequate.
The Federal Parliamentary Public Accounts Committee last week extended its inquiry into therapeutic goods and drugs to cover enforcement of standards by the states.
QNP
This followed evidence from senior federal health officials that drug companies were openly ignoring health standards because they knew they could not be prosecuted under existing state laws.
Four states _ the NT, ACT, Tasmania and Queensland _ have no licensing system for drug manufacturers.
In one recent case a blood filtration solution used in dialysis was found to contain 10 times the stated concentration of potassium.
Although the company's quality control detected the mistake, the faulty batch was still allowed to be shipped out and used in hospitals, where it could have been fatal.
It was detected only because an astute nurse noticed her patients reacting abnormally at the start of dialysis treatment and an investigation led to the product recall.
A senior Health Department official told the inquiry this was one of a number of drug recalls involving seriously defective products in the past six months.
He said the recalls highlighted serious flaws in the system of regulating manufacturers of drugs and other therapeutic goods in Australia.
In the case of the filtration solution, the official said the manufacturing company had been inspected after the recall and ""a wide range of serious manufacturing and quality control deficiencies" had been found.
""Many of the deficiencies were drawn to the company's attention over the past six years," the official said.
""However, the company had blatantly and consistently disregarded inspectors' recommendations, because of inadequacies in state legislation."
The official said this highlighted the need for a uniform national licensing and registration system for therapeutic goods. Though one has been drawn up, it is not expected to go to Federal Parliament for at least 12 months.
 Load-Date: September 20, 2003

 

End of Document


Reward Fund Reaches $900,000 for Tampering Information
The Associated Press
March 24, 1986, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1986 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 603 words
Dateline: PHILADELPHIA
Body




The over-the-counter drug industry, prompted by the recall of three medications tainted with rat poison, on Monday added $700,000 to a reward fund, but a man identifying himself as the tamperer said in a telephone call the money "isn't enough."
The reward fund, established after the 1982 Tylenol poisonings that killed seven people, swelled to $900,000 with the announcement by the Proprietary Association. The trade group acted three days after Contac, Dietac and Teldrin were recalled following the discovery of small amounts of poison in nine capsules.
In calls last week to the company and media, a man calling himself "Gary" said he tampered with the three drugs to force their manufacturer, Philadelphia-based SmithKline Beckman Corp., to stop producing capsules.
CBS affiliate WCAU-TV reported that a man identifying himself as "Gary" called its offices at 12:05 p.m. Monday.
"Your $900,000 isn't enough. I'll take more," the caller told Bonnie Jacobs, a producer.
"We do not know if this is the real 'Gary,"' Ms. Jacobs said. "I can't go into specifics on that because we turned the investigation over to the FBI."
Jacobs, 25, said the caller sounded "young, very calm and didn't sound like a whacko."
Past descriptions of "Gary's" voice have said he was calm and sounded like a man in his late 20s or early 30s.
FBI spokesman Lane Bonner in Washingon said he would not comment on the call.
"I can only say that the investigation is being conducted with (the) Food and Drug (Adminstration) and given the highest priority," Bonner said. "Beyond that, I have no comment."
The developments came as technicians for the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and the FBI continued examining capsules of the recalled over-the-counter drugs.
The recall will cost an estimated $8 million, SmithKline said Monday.
The reward fund started in 1982 when Johnson & Johnson offered $100,000 after the Tylenol poisonings in Chicago. Another $100,000 was added when a woman in suburban New York died after taking cyanide-laced Tylenol earlier this year.
Mary Simons, assistant director of public affairs for the Proprietary Association, which represents the over-the-counter drug industry, said the group added $700,000 to the fund "for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person or persons responsible for a series of criminal tamperings with over-the-counter medicines dating back to 1982."
The association set up a toll-free phone line, 1-800-222-3081, to receive confidential information on tampering.
Frank Young, head of the FDA, and Proprietary Association senior vice president John Walden defended the use of capsules on the CBS Morning News Monday.
"There is no such thing as tamper-proof medicine," said Young. "And capsules have advantages _ they are time-released and you can see through them," which could help detect tampering.
"They (capsules) aren't more of a threat. The consumer will decide if they want them," said Walden.
The tainted Contac, Dietac and Teldrin capsules were found in stores in Houston and Orlando. Young said authorities are no closer to finding who is responsible than when the tampering was discovered last week.
The poisonous substance used was warfarin, an anticoagulant and the active ingredient in rat poison, the FDA said. No injuries have been reported.
Alan Wachter, spokesman for SmithKlinie, said FDA and SmithKline physicians believe the 1-percent concentrations fo warfarin in the capsules probably would go unnoticed by a consumer.
The Proprietary Association, founded in 1881, has 83 member companies that make 95 percent of the over-the-counter medicine Americans use, Simons said.

 

End of Document


Editors: Repeating earlier story FDA probes big brand-name drug firm
United Press International
August 23, 1989, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1989 U.P.I.
Section: Washington News
Length: 326 words
Byline: By REBECCA KOLBERG, UPI Science Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Food and Drug Administration said a major brand-name drug maker is under investigation for possible manufacturing problems but the agency declined to identify the company.
The FDA, asked about a published report of the investigation, also said Tuesday the inquiry into the pharmaceutical firm is not related to the sweeping generic drug inspection announced last week.
''This is totally independent from that (generic drug investigation) and is just part of our routine'' of inspecting U.S. drug manufacturing plants every two years, FDA spokesman Bill Grigg said.
''What is rather surprising is that a big company might have any problems along these lines at all,'' said Grigg, who said manufacturing violations can include poor sanitary conditions or labeling problems.
Another FDA spokesman, Jeff Nesbit, said the investigation may lead to drug recalls, but current information does not point to any life-threatening problems with the drugs' safety or effectiveness.
The investigation has been under way for several months and it is not known when it will be completed, Nesbit said.
Word of the new investigation was first reported Tuesday by USA Today.
Last week, the FDA began wide-scale testing of the nation's top 30 generic drugs amidst growing revelations of drug switching and other fraud in the generic drug industry.
Three FDA chemists have been charged with accepting thousands of dollars in bribes from generic drug makers. More indictments are expected.
In addition, one drug firm has admitted filling capsules with a brand-name drug, instead of its own generic formula, in order to win FDA approval. Another has confessed to submitting false data to the agency. At least five generic drugs have been recalled as a result of the scandal.
Generic drugs, which account for up to one-third of the U.S. prescription drug market, are chemically equivalent to brand-name drugs whose patents have expired. They are generally cheaper than brand-name products.

 

End of Document


Maker Recalls 7 Products
The Associated Press
October 20, 1989, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 234 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A small generic drug manufacturer in New York is recalling seven products because the company filed false information to win government approval for the drugs, company and FDA officials said Friday.
Quantum Pharmics of Amityville, N.Y., last month suspended the production and distribution of all 21 of its generic drugs pending completion of an internal audit.
American Home Products Corp. of New York said the audit found that the seven drugs being recalled had been approved "on the basis of false information filed by the company's (Quantum's) prior management."
American Home Products completed acquisition of Quantum in June 1988, said spokeswoman Carol Emerling.
The FDA said that for some of the drugs, the company told the agency the size of the production batch submitted for testing to gain FDA approval was larger than it actually was. For other drugs, the FDA said it was concerned about data submitted in the original applications for approval.
The drugs being recalled are minoxidil tablets, chlorazepate dipotassium tablets, meclofenamate sodium capsules, trazadone, doxepin, diazepam and lorazapam.
Both the FDA and the company said there was no indication of any safety problem with any of the drugs.
Quantum is among more than 30 generic drug manufacturers being investigated by the FDA following disclosures of irregularities ranging from falsified records to misrepresentation of test data.

 

End of Document


FDA probes big brand-name drug firm
United Press International
August 22, 1989, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1989 U.P.I.
Section: Financial
Length: 326 words
Byline: By REBECCA KOLBERG, UPI Science Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Food and Drug Administration said Tuesday a major brand-name drug maker is under investigation for possible manufacturing problems but the agency declined to identify the company.
The FDA, asked about a published report of the investigation, also said the inquiry into the pharmaceutical firm is not related to the sweeping generic drug inspection announced last week.
''This is totally independent from that (generic drug investigation) and is just part of our routine'' of inspecting U.S. drug manufacturing plants every two years, FDA spokesman Bill Grigg said.
''What is rather surprising is that a big company might have any problems along these lines at all,'' said Grigg, who said manufacturing violations can include poor sanitary conditions or labeling problems.
Another FDA spokesman, Jeff Nesbit, said the investigation may lead to drug recalls, but current information does not point to any life-threatening problems with the drugs' safety or effectiveness.
The investigation has been under way for several months and it is not known when it will be completed, Nesbit said.
Word of the new investigation was first reported Tuesday by USA Today.
Last week, the FDA began wide-scale testing of the nation's top 30 generic drugs amidst growing revelations of drug switching and other fraud in the generic drug industry.
Three FDA chemists have been charged with accepting thousands of dollars in bribes from generic drug makers. More indictments are expected.
In addition, one drug firm has admitted filling capsules with a brand-name drug, instead of its own generic formula, in order to win FDA approval. Another has confessed to submitting false data to the agency. At least five generic drugs have been recalled as a result of the scandal.
Generic drugs, which account for up to one-third of the U.S. prescription drug market, are chemically equivalent to brand-name drugs whose patents have expired. They are generally cheaper than brand-name products.

 

End of Document


New drug approval procedures proposed
United Press International
October 19, 1982, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1982 U.P.I.
Section: Washington News
Length: 339 words
Byline: By D'VERA COHN
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Urging the biggest overhaul of federal drug approval procedures in 20 years, the Reagan administration is proposing changes that would get new products on the market six months faster, officials said.
In a statement, Health and Human Services Secretary Richard Schweiker said the changes ''represent the most significant reform of the new drug approval process since the 1960s.''
The changes would allow the FDA to approve drugs based solely on reputable foreign studies, provide for a streamlined application format, a speedier appeals procedure, elimination of much paperwork, and new requirements for post-approval reports of serious side effects.
Officials said the changes would reduce processing time by six months for most new drug applications.
The reduction will be far less for so-called ''significant new drugs.'' It currently takes an average of two years to approve new drug applications.
The changes will ''benefit thousands of Americans by making beneficial new therapies available more promptly,'' Schweiker said. ''These revisions will serve the public interest by improving FDA's management effectiveness in the new drug area and by adding new safety protections for consumers.''
Critics, including the Ralph Nader-founded Public Citizen Health Research Group, warned the proposals could result in inadequately tested drugs being rushed to market.
The proposals, to be published in Tuesday's Federal Register for 60 days of public comment, were first announced in June by Schweiker and Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Arthur Hull Hayes.
A safety provision, prompted by the August recall of the arthritis drug Oraflex only three months after it went on the market, has been added since then. The provision requires drug manufacturers to update their applications periodically with any new safety information during FDA review.
Critics charged Oraflex manufacturer Eli Lily Co. failed to tell the government of new information about deaths of Oraflex patients in Britain, where the drug had been sold for nearly two years.

 

End of Document


Faster drug approval planned
United Press International
October 18, 1982, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1982 U.P.I.
Section: Financial
Length: 345 words
Byline: By D VERA COHN
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Reagan administration, urging the biggest overhaul of federal drug approval procedures in 20 years, formally proposed changes Monday that officials said would get new products on the market six months faster.
The changes will ''benefit thousands of Americans by making beneficial new therapies available more promptly,'' Health and Human Services Secretary Richard Schweiker said in a statement.
He said the changes ''represent the most significant reform of the new drug approval process since the 1960s.''
''These revisions will serve the public interest by improving FDA's management effectiveness in the new drug area and by adding new safety protections for consumers,'' Schweiker said.
The proposals, to be published in the Federal Register Tuesday for 60 days of public comment, were first announced in June by Schweiker and Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Arthur Hull Hayes.
A safety provision, prompted by the August recall of the arthritis drug Oraflex only three months after it went on the market, has been added since then. The provision requires drug manufacturers to update their applications periodically with any new safety information during FDA review.
Critics charged Oraflex manufacturer Eli Lilly Co. failed to tell the government of new information about deaths of Oraflex patients in Britain, where the drug had been sold for nearly two years.
The changes also would allow the FDA to approve drugs based solely on reputable foreign studies, provide for a streamlined application format, a speedier appeals procedure, elimination of much paperwork, and new requirements for post-approval reports of serious side effects.
Officials said the changes would reduce processing time by six months for most new drug applications, but the reduction will be far less for so-called ''significant new drugs.'' It currently takes an average of two years to approve new drug applications.
Critics, including the Ralph Nader-founded Public Citizen Health Research Group, warned the proposals could result in inadequately tested drugs being rushed to the market.

 

End of Document


Faster drug approval planned
United Press International
October 18, 1982, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1982 U.P.I.
Section: Washington News
Length: 345 words
Byline: By D VERA COHN
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Reagan administration, urging the biggest overhaul of federal drug approval procedures in 20 years, formally proposed changes Monday that officials said would get new products on the market six months faster.
The changes will ''benefit thousands of Americans by making beneficial new therapies available more promptly,'' said Health and Human Services Secretary Richard Schweiker in a statement.
He said the changes ''represent the most significant reform of the new drug approval process since the 1960s.''
''These revisions will serve the public interest by improving FDA's management effectiveness in the new drug area and by adding new safety protections for consumers,'' Schweiker said.
The proposals, to be published in the Federal Register Tuesday for 60 days of public comment, were first announced in June by Schweiker and Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Arthur Hull Hayes.
A safety provision, prompted by the August recall of the arthritis drug Oraflex only three months after it went on the market, has been added since then. The provision requires drug manufacturers to update their applications periodically with any new safety information during FDA review.
Critics charged Oraflex manufacturer Eli Lily Co. failed to tell the government of new information about deaths of Oraflex patients in Britain, where the drug had been sold for nearly two years.
The changes also would allow the FDA to approve drugs based solely on reputable foreign studies, provide for a streamlined application format, a speedier appeals procedure, elimination of much paperwork, and new requirements for post-approval reports of serious side effects.
Officials said the changes would reduce processing time by six months for most new drug applications, but the reduction will be far less for so-called ''significant new drugs.'' It currently takes an average of two years to approve new drug applications.
Critics, including the Ralph Nader-founded Public Citizen Health Research Group, warned the proposals could result in inadequately tested drugs being rushed to the market.

 

End of Document


FDA Drafting Direct-to-Consumer Rx Ad Rules
ADWEEK
April 16, 1984, Eastern Edition

 Copyright 1984 Adweek LLC. All Rights Reserved.
Length: 485 words
Byline: By Anne M. Russell
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The Food and Drug Administration last Friday released the results of its four-city study of 1,500 consumers' responses to television and print ads for two fictitious prescription drugs.  The FDA also announced that it will begin drafting regulations for "limited market tests" of pharmaceutical advertising in conjunction with the publication of the direct-to-consumers (DTC) advertising study.
At present, the pharmaceutical industry is under a 14-month-old moratorium on DTC prescription-drug advertising.  Last week's announcement will not represent any immediate change in policy, an FDA spokesperson explained.
"I can't imagine how the agency would whip anything together in less than nine months," he said.However, he added, "that doesn't preclude some temporary guidelines from being issued in the meantime, if the issue becomes too bogged down in controversy."
The FDA's announcement was greeted with cautious enthusiasm by members of the major pharmaceutical advertising specialty firms.
Said William Castagnoli, president of Medicus Intercon International, "The key word here is 'limited.' DTC advertising will happen, but it will evolve in stages.  We're edging toward it, and I think that's the way to go."
John Blaney, Ogilvy & Mather general manager and liaison with O&M's recently acquired Rolf Werner Rosenthal, concurred: "DTC has to be approached carefully and professionally.  It will start in a limited fashion, with careful monitoring of the consumer and medical profession reactions."
Among the highlights of the study, as determined by the FDA's Division of Drug Advertising, was the fact that there was "no evidence of information overload -- too much information for consumers to understand." This was measured through recall testing following ad viewing.
In spite of the FDA's interpretation, however, its statistics showed that only 25 percent of the consumers tested were able to pinpoint accurately the therapeutic purpose of the advertised drug, while 6 percent completely misunderstood its use.
Recall of the television commercials, regardless of how much "brief summary" information they contained, was higher than that of the print versions.
For both formats, consumer recall of the two drugs' purported benefits was higher than recall of risk information, no matter how lengthy the warnings.
Confidence in the physician as the final source of drug information and guidance remained strong: 75 percent of those questioned responded that only a physician could determine if a drug should or should not be prescribed.
What the FDA's first cautious step toward permitting DTC drug advertising will ultimately signify to the pharmaceutical and advertising industries is, as Castagnoli points out, hard to foresee.
"I don't think anyone is capable of saying what this will mean to the conventional promotional mix in the pharmaceutical industry and to the traditional doctor-patient relationship."

 

End of Document


Johnson mixed own steroid ''cocktail''
United Press International
June 15, 1989, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1989 U.P.I.
Section: Sports News
Length: 266 words
Byline: By JANET BROOKS
Dateline: TORONTO
Body




Ben Johnson expertly mixed his own steroid ''cocktail'' when his coach and doctor unavailable, another athlete told a government inquiry Thursday.
Canadian discus thrower Rob Gray testified that Johnson carefully drew fluid into a syringe from two bottles the sprinter brought to Gray's Toronto apartment in March 1986.
Gray then injected Johnson.
Johnson testifed earlier this week that he did not mix the syringe administered to him by Gray. Johnson said he would not have known what or how much to take.
Johnson also testified that he did not recall bringing his own drugs to Gray's apartment.
But Gray said Johnson seemed expert at mixing the steroid and inocine.
''He definitely knew what he was doing,'' Gray testified. ''He measured it out exactly and made sure there were no bubbles in it which is something that is important.''
Gray said he suggested that Johnson should learn to do his own injections.
''Ben you do everything else, why don't you learn how to give yourself a shot?'' Gray recalled asking Johnson. ''Then you wouldn't have to run around town doing this.''
The inquiry into drug use in Canadian sport was prompted by Johnson's positive test for the anabolic steroid stanozolol at the Seoul Olympics.
Johnson, who was stripped of his gold medal in the men's 100 meters, finally admitted earlier this week that he'd used performance-enhancing drugs since 1981.
But Johnson, reluctant to accept complete responsibility, insisted that neither his coach or doctor informed him of possible side-effects. Johnson also painted himself as a less-than-active participant in his own drug program.

 

End of Document


COMPUTERS CROSS-CHECKING USE OF MEDICINES
The New York Times
July 21, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

 Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk
Length: 1380 words
Byline: By LISA BELKIN
Body




Pharmacists across the country have begun using computers to avoid dangerous interactions among the prescription drugs patients take, the foods they eat, their allergies and the over-the-counter medicines they use.
 The Boston Collaborative Drug Surveillance Program at Boston University, a clearinghouse for information on the side effects of drugs, estimates that $4.5 billion in hospital bills and over 100 deaths result from such interactions each year.
''If there's a such thing as a wave of the future, this is it,'' said Dr. Edward G. Feldmann, vice president for scientific affairs of the American Pharmaceutical Association, the national professional society for pharmacists in Washington. ''Nearly every store will have some sort of system. It's a sound economic investment for the stores, and it's a major advance in the health care of patients.''
''I would guess if you took all the chain drugstores in the country, only 20 percent are fully computerized right now,'' said Bruce H. Colligen, director of special studies for the National Association of Chain Drug Stores in Alexandria, Va. ''But that's compared with almost zero percent a few years ago. By 1990, that number will probably be 90 or 95 percent. It's going strong.'' As pharmacies join supermarkets and other retail establishments now rapidly entering the computer age, industry sources say that in the next five years computers will also be able to help drugstores determine which patients have purchased drugs that have been recalled by their manufacturers. The computers also will be able to alert pharmacists when patients are refilling prescriptions more or less often than they should be.
But use of such systems has raised the concern that they can make it easier for unauthorized people to get private medical information.
Nonetheless, dozens of companies that operate drugstore chains - among them, the Walgreen Company, Fay's Drug Company, Giant Food Inc., the Jack Eckerd Corporation, the Duane Reade Corporation, the Pathmark division of the Supermarkets General Corporation and the Rite Aid Corporation - are using or testing computer systems.
Customers of these stores fill out a patient profile, including their name, address and telephone number, physician's name, drug and food allergies, chronic illnesses and the medications they commonly take.
Before filling a prescription, the pharmacists can call up the profile to see if there are dangerous interactions between the chemicals in the prescription and those that are part of the customer's daily life. If a problem is discovered, the patient's physician is called.
 
Adverse Chemical Interactions
The possible adverse chemical interactions range from headaches and nausea to depression, internal bleeding and death, according to Harlan Steinbaum, president of Medicare-Glaser, a 102-store chain based in St. Louis that has developed a data base with 17,000 possible interactions. Mr. Steinbaum's company has been testing its system for more than 10 years.
According to a recent survey of Medicare-Glaser stores that have been using the system for more than a year, 15 to 17 percent of all the prescriptions brought in to be filled involved some kind of potential drug interaction, and 5 percent of these could have resulted in hospitalization or death.
The following are examples of the potential hazards the Medicare- Glaser computer system has called to the attention of its pharmacists: aspirin combined with blood thinners can cause hemorrhaging, the antibiotic ampicillin can reduce the effectiveness of birth-control pills and the antibiotic erythromycin can triple the potency of the heart medication digoxin, resulting in severe heart problems.
One reason patients are getting prescriptions for drugs that pose a hazard when taken together is that many of them are seeing more than one doctor.
''People are going to specialists for their problems,'' said Candyce Daley, a spokesman for the Fay's Drug Company, which uses the MonitoRx data base, developed by a physician in Cleveland, to spot possible drug interactions for customers in its 100 stores throughout New York State. ''They see their allergist, their cardiologist, their psychiatrist, their plastic surgeon and then their dentist. They don't always tell them what other medicines they're on.''
Another reason is the increasing number of chemical reactions that patients, doctors and pharmacists must watch for.
According to Kenneth W. Anderson, a pharmacist who is a vice president and director of professional relations at Medicare-Glaser, about 75 new chemical entities were approved by the Food and Drug Administration last year alone.
''I don't see how any one person can keep track of all of this,'' he said. ''A computer does it so easily. I don't know how you can do it without one.''
''I'm quite prepared to be corrected for any mistake I might make,'' said Dr. Edwin P. Maynard 3d, an internist at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston and an associate clinical professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School. ''I think the basic concept of the system is excellent. The primary responsibility, of course, still lies with the prescribing physician, but we welcome all assistance.''
Although the computer systems are becoming more common, they are expensive, costing about $10,000 per store. According to the National Association of Retail Druggists, few independent pharmacies are using them, and many large chains are moving slowly.
Pathmark, with 107 drugstores and pharmacy departments in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut, has been testing software from three companies in five stores over the past three months and intends to expand the test to 10 more stores during the next month.
Walgreens installed a computer system in its 911 pharmacies in February. Intercom, as the system is called, is mostly a record-keeping tool, storing information on patients, their prescriptions, allergies, physicians' names and whether they like their medicines packaged in child-proof containers.
The computer prints labels, gives receipts and completes the myriad forms required by the Federal and state governments each time a prescription is dispensed. Because the system links all Walgreen stores, customers can refill their prescription at virtually any of them. Almost all of the Walgreen stores are in states that allow the exchange of medical information among pharmacies.
So far, however, the Walgreen system does not check for possible drug interactions. ''The technology is there,'' said William G. Thien, director of health services for the chain, ''and it's on the list of things we plan to do. But getting through that list takes time.''
Also projected, he said, is a method for recalling drugs quickly in an emergency. The system was being tested at the time of the Tylenol contamination in Chicago in 1982 and, Mr. Thien said, all Walgreen stores were notified by computer to take the product off their shelves as soon as the danger became apparent.
''Expand on that idea,'' Mr. Thien said. ''In the future, if they recall a drug, we can go into the computer and ask which patients have bought this drug, then contact those patients.''
 
Pinpointing Problems
Similarly, he said, computers someday could monitor whether patients are taking their medication properly. ''The computer will know the patient was prescribed 100 tablets, should take 3 a day and will need more in 33 days,'' Mr. Thien said. ''If he comes back for a refill every 20 days, or if he doesn't come back for 45 days, we'll know there's a problem.''
That power to watch over patients' lives makes some pharmacists wary. ''It's a touchy situation,'' said Joseph Dweck, vice president of data processing for Duane Reade, which has 24 stores in Manhattan and will be installing some sort of computer system in the next few months. ''We're worried about how far we should go, and we're worried about what we're liable for if mistakes are made in the data base.''
''The pharmacist has always had access to patient information in the past,'' Mr. Thien said. ''We've always warned patients of potential problems, and if we suspect drug abuse we already have the legal obligation to do something. The machine makes it technologically easier, faster, less expensive. But it does not change what has always been done.''
 Graphic



 
photo of Dennis Frenz (page 52)

 

End of Document


New Efforts to Treat the Headaches That Won't Go Away
The Associated Press
August 8, 1984, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1984 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 1247 words
Byline: AN AP Extra, PAUL RAEBURN, AP Science Writer
Dateline: SCOTTSDALE, Ariz.
Body




For most people, a headache is a nuisance, something that creeps into their skulls only when they're inching through a traffic jam or trying to balance a checking account.
For as many as 20 million Americans, however, headaches strike again and again, defying reason and remedy. The recurrent pain can disrupt jobs and families and leave its victims feeling isolated and misunderstood.
"Headache is not a tangible thing like cancer, high blood pressure," said Dr. Seymour Diamond, executive director of the American Association for the Study of Headache, at the association's February meeting in Scottsdale. "It's always easy to explain it away as a psychosomatic disease."
The cause of most headaches is a mystery. In all but a few victims, "the physical and neurological examination is perfectly normal," said Dr. Seymour Solomon, director of the nation's first headache clinic, at the Montefiore Hospital and Medical Center in New York City.
Take the case of one of Solomon's patients, 47-year-old Joseph Venditto of Yorktown Heights, N.Y. His headaches began suddenly seven years ago, when he awoke one night with an intense stabbing pain in his right eye.
Within minutes, he recalled, "I felt like my throat was closing. I started gasping for breath."
Venditto could think of nothing that might have prompted the ominous attack. He hadn't bumped his head and was under no unusual stress or anxiety. "I saw a doctor and he said it was nothing to be concerned about, it will pass," Venditto said. All Venditto's medical tests were normal.
The attacks continued for two or three months, coming as often as 10 times a day. Then, without warning, the headaches stopped. But not for long. Six months later, the attacks had resumed, as they have once or twice a year ever since.
Venditto estimates he has taken up to 40 different drugs in the seven years since the headaches began. He was referred to the Montefiore headache unit last year and is _ for the moment _ free of headaches. But theres no telling how long that will last.
Venditto's experience is familiar to many headache sufferers. While the familiar tension headache can usually be dispatched with an aspirin or two, more serious headaches can be extremely difficult to get rid of.
Drugs, surgery and other therapies are chosen by a kind of educated guesswork. Until researchers figure out what causes headaches, they will not know how to cure them _ except by trial-and-error.
Because headaches are such an erratic disorder, it's hard to tell when a drug is working. Some patients, like Venditto, will periodically get better all by themselves. "You give them anything you want, and the patient thinks you're a great doctor," said Dr. Donald Dalessio, chairman of the department of medicine at the Scripps Clinic Medical Group in La Jolla, Calif.
In the search for causes, doctors have found that some headaches are related to increases and decreases in blood flow to the brain. Often hormonal and nervous system irregularities seem to play roles.
But there are many kinds of headaches, each presumably with a different cause. Tension headaches are linked to a tightening of muscles in the head. Migraines may involve changes in blood flow, perhaps combined with some irregularity in the nervous system. Jaw problems can cause headaches, too; the condition is known as temperomandibular joint syndrome, or TMJ.
Venditto suffers from what are called cluster headaches, perhaps the most sinister and devastating of headaches. Why they linger, and then vanish, for months at a time is a mystery.
Headaches of all kinds can be triggered by stress or depression, bright lights, changes in weather, disruption of sleep patterns and, possibly, cigarettes.
Alcohol, too, may be a factor in headaches other than those that come with hangovers.
|MORE
A few headaches, about 10 percent, are caused by clear physical abnormalities. Brain tumors are perhaps the most frightening cause of headaches.
But tumors are rare and tumor headaches are relatively easy to identify. "They come on like the Washington Redskin line," said Dr. Arnold Friedman of Tucson, Ariz., the semiretired founder of the Montefiore clinic. They also cause vision problems and personality changes, Friedman said, and, unlike some other headaches, can usually be relieved by aspirin.
Head injuries and meningitis (an infection of the coverings of the brain or spinal cord) can also cause headaches, as can malformation of arteries and blood vessels in the brain.
In the elderly, a condition called temporal arteritis, an inflammation of arteries in the temples, is another cause.
When no clear physical cause is present, doctors are forced to experiment with treatments to see what works.
Hundreds of drugs are available. Americans spend $300 million a year on popular headache remedies, according to Solomon at Montefiore. (The estimates that 12 million to 20 million Americans suffer from severe headaches are based on sales of headache drugs, Diamond said.)
The drugs most often used to block a migraine attack re called ergotamines. Drugs like aspirin, codeine, Darvon and Percodan can sometimes reduce the severity of attack, but abuse of those drugs is a serious problem, said Dr. Joel Saper, director of the private Michigan Headache and Neurological Institute in Ann Arbor, Mich. Many desperate headache sufferers take too many or take them too often.
Other drugs are used to try to stop headaches before they begin. Tranquilizers and anti-depressants sometimes help, although doctors don't understand why. One of the best preventatives for migraine, said Dr. James Couch, chief of neurology at Southern Illinois University, is a drug called methysergide, a member of the LSD family.
In the 1960s, doctors using a new class of heart drugs called beta blockers found the drugs could relieve migraine attacks. One of these drugs, propranolol (brand name: Inderal), is now widely used to treat headaches.
Calcium blockers, a newer class of heart drugs, also look promising. One of them, nimodepine, seems better than the others because it seems to concentrate in the head. But nimodepine is available only for experimental use.
Drugs are not always the best treatment, however. Cluster headaches, for example, seem to respond well to inhaling pure oxygen. Some victims of the disorder keep canisters of oxygen in their homes or workplaces.
Many headache experts recommend changes in diet, although no one can explain why such things as cheese, chocolate, milk and other foods seem to trigger or aggravate headaches.
"I think (diet) is a factor in 30 percent to 40 percent of the people," said Diamond, based on practical results he gets with patients in his clinic in Chicago. On the other hand, he said, "my own research casts some doubt on it."
"Diet is probably one of the most overstated causes of migraine," agreed Dr. Arthur Elkind of Mount Vernon Hospital in Mount Vernon, N.Y.
Vitamins have been used to fight headaches, but Diamond frowns on that. "There's never been a shred of evidence that vitamins help in preventing headaches," he said.
Biofeedback _ the use of electronic monitors to train patients to relax or to control body functions in ways that might alleviate headaches _ is another frequently used tool.
The experts agree that the cornerstones of successful headache treatment are understanding and careful attention.
"What a migraine patient needs more than all the drugs and all the instructions is a doctor who's going to give them continuity of care," said Diamond.
 Graphic



 
LaserGraphic NY4 of Aug. 3

 

End of Document


234,000 Bottles Being Recalled
The Associated Press
April 20, 1983, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1983 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 450 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Food and Drug Administration said Wednesday that 234,000 bottles of baby shampoo, sold widely under a variety of brand names, will be recalled because of bacterial contamination that can infect scratched or cut skin and eyes.
The shampoo was packaged by Pennex Products Company Inc. of Verona, Pa. and is sold under more than two dozen house brands. Pennex began the recall after FDA tests showed the bacteria in one isolated lot. But further tests by the company and by FDA showed the problem to be more widespread and led to the broad recall.
The company has stopped using equipment which it believes is the source of the contamination.
Pennex distributed the product nationally as Soothex and Mara Lynne brands or with a generic label saying simply "Baby Shampoo."
The product also is sold as the Treasury brand baby shampoo by the Treasury Drug Division of J.C. Penney Co., New York, and as the Army and Air Force Exchange Service's AAFES Baby Shampoo.
In addition, it was sold in the Northeast as Baby-Mate, distributed by Adams Drug Co. of Pawtucket, R.I.; Courtesy, distributed by Port Washington Distributor of Port Washington, N.Y.; Drug Guild by Drug Guild Dist. of Seacaucus, N.J.; Filene's distributed by Filene's and Sons Co. of Boston; Happy Harry's by Merchandisers Inc. of Newark, N.J.; Heck's by Tri-State Distributors Inc. of Nitro, W.Va.; LSA by L.S. Anster and Co. Inc. of Westbury, N.Y.; Medalist by Spectro of Jenkintown, Pa.; Tops by Niagara Frontier Services of Buffalo, N.Y.; Top Value by S & P Drug of Brooklyn, N.Y.; and West Medical by West Medical Inc. of Framingham, Mass.
In the South, the baby shampoo was sold as Kerr brand by Kerr Discount Drug Stores of Raleigh, N.C.; Our Brand by SAS Products of Jacksonville, Fla.; Rose's by Rose's Stores of Henderson, N.C.; and Shopper's Drug Mart of Shopper's Drug Mart Inc., Boca Raton, Fla.
In the Midwest, the affected baby shampoo brands are Baby Touch, distributed by B and E Sales Inc. of Detroit; Coop brand by Universal Cooperatives of Minneapolis, Minn.; Elder-Beerman, distributed by Elder-Beerman Stores of Dayton, Ohio; Gold Circle by Gold Circle Division of Federated Stores, Worthington, Ohio; Seaway by Seaway Foods, Cleveland, Ohio; and Sunfresh, distributed by Sunfresh Inc. of St. Paul, Minn.
In the West, the product was sold under the brand name F & D by a company of the same name in Benicia, Calif.
The lot numbers under recall can be differentiated by these codes: A13F, A17F, A28F, D20E2, F14E, F16E, G13E, G14E, G14E1, G22E, G29E, H12E, H13E, H16E, H18E, H19E, H24E, H24E1, I1E, J4E, J5E1, J5E2, J6E, J6E1, J8E, J8E1, J12E, J20E, J20E1, J21E, J22E, J25E, J25E1, K22E, K30E, L1E, L3E, L6E, L6E1, L7E, L13E, L20E.

 

End of Document


Govt warns doctors over suspect drugs
The Advertiser
January 28, 1987 Wednesday

 Copyright 1987 Nationwide News Pty Limited
Length: 556 words
Body




SYDNEY - The Federal Government yesterday warned doctors against prescribing 33 drugs, some of them used to treat life-threatening illnesses, to new patients, pending further studies.
 The drugs, available in Australia for a number of years, mainly through public hospitals, are under the microscope because of alleged deficiencies in tests vital to their registration.
 The Government, following recommendations from the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee (ADEC), also advised doctors already prescribing the drugs to monitor their patients until manufacturers had provided adequate information on the drugs' safety.
aap
The drugs concerned are mainly used to treat high blood pressure, diabetes, heart diseases and urinary problems.
 ADEC chairman, Professor Mervyn Eadie, said although there was no proof the drugs were any less effective or more effective than other brands of the same drugs, it was a possibility.
 "In that uncertainty some patients may be inadequately treated, some patients to an extent may be overtreated," Professor Eadie told a Press conference in Sydney.
 "The best advice we can give is that patients who are taking them and getting along on them should continue to take them until the situation is reviewed by their doctors," he said.
 Australia is believed to be the first country in the world to take action against the drugs.
 The Federal Minister for Health, Dr Blewett, has notified the World Health Organisation and other overseas agencies which have used the company that tested the drugs.
 Dr Blewett said concern was not on the material within the drugs but of their bio-equivalence - the rate and extent to which a drug entered a person's bloodstream.
 The bio-equivalence of the drugs in question was assessed by a testing company in South Africa, reportedly operating out of a house.
 Professor Eadie admitted the information available was not completely reassuring because he did not have reliable bio-equivalence data on the drugs.
 Although the manufacturers, Alphapharm and Protea, have been given 12 months to submit satisfactory bio-equivalence data, the Commonwealth chief health officer, Dr Ron Wells, said he expected a submission from the two companies soon.
 Dr Blewett said yesterday's decision was made after ADEC pieced together a puzzle on the 33 drugs over a number of years.
 But the Australian Pharmaceutical Manufacturers' Association claimed the Commonwealth Health Department had delayed its decision for nearly two years. It called on Dr Blewett to recall the drugs following ADEC's report.
 The APMA chief executive officer, Mr Kerry Bell, said the Government was introducing double standards by accepting questionable registration data for generic pharmaceuticals.
 "The Government's desire to reduce health costs by encouraging the marketing and prescribing of generic products should not compromise community safety at the expense of the reputation and credibility of the research-based pharmaceutical industry," Mr Bell said.
 Dr Blewett said there was no evidence of adverse reaction to any of the drugs.
 "We are asking doctors who note any problems with them to notify the adverse drugs committee about their concerns," he said.
 He said transferring a patient to a similar drug could be more
dangerous than staying on the questionble drug because of different dosages in various brands.
 Load-Date: September 19, 2003

 

End of Document


TAINTED ANTICOAGULANT DRUG FOR TREATING CANCER RECALLED
The New York Times
March 16, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

 Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 33, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 182 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: WASHINGTON, March 15
Body




An anticoagulant drug used in the treatment of several types of cancer is being recalled by its manufacturer because of contamination by potentially dangerous bacteria, the Food and Drug Administration said Friday.
The drug, which slows blood clotting, is Torigian brand preservative-free heparin sodium injectable solution in a concentration of 1,000 units per milliliter.
It was shipped to hospitals and is used only by physicians, ordinarily in transplants of bone marrow for the treatment of several kinds of cancer.
The drug agency said doctors treating bone marrow cultures at the University of Minnesota Hospital in Minneapolis discovered in routine tests that the solution contained Pseudomonas putida, a bacteria.
The agency said investigators had tested other samples from the same lot and confirmed the presence of the bacteria. That lot, No. 84339, the agency said, is being recalled by the manufacturer, Torigian Laboratories Division of Pharma-Serve Inc., of Queens Village, N.Y.
Torigian is the only American manufacturer of preservative-free heparin in the 1,000-unit concentration.

 

End of Document


Drug Manufacturer Pulls Pain-Reliever From Market
The Associated Press
March 5, 1983, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1983 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 645 words
Dateline: NEW BRUNSWICK, N.J.
Body




An "apparent increase" in allergic reactions to a prescription pain reliever called ZOMAX, including five deaths, has prompted the manufacturer to recall the drug.
Johnson & Johnson Inc. said Friday that its subsidiary, McNeil Pharmaceutical of Spring House, Pa., is "temporarily withdrawing ZOMAX" until a new label spelling out possible side effects can be issued in consultation with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
The drug, introduced in October 1980 and since used by an estimated 15 million people, will not have to be taken from the market permanently, FDA spokesman Chris Smith said in Washington.
The company said it noticed an "apparent increase in the number of allergic reactions" to ZOMAX last month. It did not indicate how long the product might be off the market.
"The latest number of total allergic reactions we have had reported to us is about 1,001. The severity of these reactions have ranged from mild rash" to extreme hypersensitivity, a Johnson & Johnson statement said.
The company did not reveal the identities of the five ZOMAX victims or exactly when they died. Two deaths occurred in Massachusetts, and one each in New York, North Dakota and Kansas, said company spokesman James Murray.
ZOMAX often is prescribed to arthritis sufferers.
"We request that any consumer having ZOMAX return the drug to the drugstore" for a refund, said the statement.
The product also is sold overseas, but no action on foreign distribution has been taken pending "discussion with the appropriate regulatory agencies" in other countries, said spokesman Marshall Molloy said.
"Three of the deaths occurred during the last two months," said Robert Andrews, another Johnson & Johnson spokesman. The deaths were attributed to "allergic and anaphylactoid reactions" to ZOMAX, known generically as zomepirac sodium.
An anaphylactic reaction occurs when the body's defense overreacts drastically to a foreign substance.
Two of the people who died were sensitive to aspirin, and a package insert warned such people not to use the product, Molloy said. The other three deaths still are under investigation, Andrews said.
Johnson & Johnson through McNeil Pharmaceutical also makes the non-prescription pain reliever Tylenol. Seven people in the Chicago area died after taking cyanide-laced Extra-Strength Tylenol capsules last September and October; the tamperer has not been caught.
The company incurred high costs in recalling Tylenol and then reissuing the medication in tamper-resistant packages.
Wall Street reacted to the ZOMAX recall by bidding down J & J's stock price by $2.25, to $48 a share. Trading in the stock was halted briefly on the New York Stock Exchange.
Smith said only a small proportion of ZOMAX users are subject to adverse side effects. "To date we have a rate of only one allergic reaction for every 15,000 who take the drug. That's very rare," he said.
He said the FDA and the drug's manufacturer have been working on a new label for the product since last year to advise physicians of the potential hazard.
"ZOMAX is like penicillin. Many people are allergic to penicillin, but penicillin is valuable to many others, so you wouldn't want to pull it off the market," Smith said.
One Syracuse, N.Y., doctor who survived a near-fatal reaction to a single dose of ZOMAX, said the drug is too dangerous to use.
"The major problem is that this is primarily a pain-killer, and there are 10 or 15 other drugs that can do the same thing safely. Why take a chance with this?" Dr. Jack Yoffa said Friday.
Yoffa, an obstetrician and gynecologist, said he nearly died in a car crash last Dec. 14 after reacting to a ZOMAX tablet he took for a back ailment. He said he blacked out shortly after taking the drug and crashed into a light pole.
Yoffa, whose pulse stopped but who recovered after injections of adrenalin, said the speed of the reaction was especially worrisome.
 Graphic



 
Laserphoto NY5

 

End of Document


33 DRUGS BANNED FOR NEW PATIENTS
Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)
January 28, 1987 Wednesday
Late Edition

 Copyright 1987 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS AND FEATURES; Pg. 3
Length: 607 words
Byline: CHRIS THOMAS, Medical Reporter
Body




The Federal Government has banned doctors from prescribing 33 drugs to new patients, pending further studies.
The drugs are mainly used to treat high blood pressure, diabetes, heart diseases and urinary problems. Some are used to treat life-threatening illnesses.
They have been available in Australia for years, mainly through public hospitals, but now they are under the microscope because of doubts about the tests which were vital to their registrations.
Australia is believed to be the first country to take such action against the drugs.
The Government, following recommendations from the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee, has advised doctors already prescribing the drugs to monitor these patients closely until the drug manufacturers have provided adequate information on the drugs' safety.
But the Australian Pharmaceutical Manufacturers' Association called on the Federal Health Minister, Dr Blewett, to recall the drugs entirely. The APMA chief executive officer, Mr Kerry Bell, said the Government was accepting questionable registration data for generic pharmaceuticals (that is, drugs made by companies other than those which had originally developed them, after the original patents had expired). "The Government's desire to reduce health costs by encouraging the marketing and prescribing of generic products should not compromise community safety," Mr Bell said.
Dr Blewett said that concern was not felt about the material within the drugs but about their bio-equivalence - the rate and extent at which a drug entered a person's bloodstream.
The bio-equivalence of the drugs in question was assessed by a testing company in South Africa. Dr Blewett said yesterday's decision was made after the ADEC had pieced together some puzzles about the 33 drugs over a number of years.
He added that there was no evidence of any adverse reactions to these drugs but "we are asking any doctor who notes any problems to notify the drugs committee". The ADEC chairman, Professor Mervyn Eadie, said that the information available was not completely reassuring because the committee did not have reliable bio-equivalence data on the drugs.
"In that uncertainty, some patients may be inadequately treated and some patients to an extent overtreated," Professor Eadie told a press conference in Sydney.
Although the manufacturers, Alphapharm and Protea, have been given 12 months to submit satisfactory bio-equivalence data, the Commonwealth chief health officer, Dr Ron Wells, said he expected a submission from the two companies shortly.
Trade names of the drugs affected (with chemical names in brackets) are:
Alepam tablets (oxazepam), Alodorm tablets (nitrazepam), Alprim tablets(trimethoprim), Amizide tablets (amiloride with hydrochlorthiazide), Anpine capsules (nifedipine), Antenex tablets (diazepam), Arthrexin capsules(indomethacin), Benzotran tablets (oxazepam), Captol tablets (oxprenolol), Cardinol tablets (propranolol), Corbeton tablets (oxprenolol).
Diatol tablets (tolbutamide), Dimal tablets (methyldopa), Dipramol tablets(dipyridamole), Grisfulvin tablets (griseofulvin), Hypnodorm tablets(flunitrazepam), Inflam tablets (ibuprofen), Kaluril tablets (amiloride), Lorizide tablets (amiloride with hydrochlorthiazide), Naxen tablets(naproxen), Nortrip tablets (nortriptyline).
Pacedol tablets (haloperidol), Presolol tablets (labetalol), Quinsul tablets (quinine sulphate), Rimycin capsules (rifampicin), Spirotone tablets(spironolactone), Sulazine tablets (sulphasalazine), Temazin capsules(temazepam), Thioprine tablets (azathioprine), Trichozole tablets(metronidazole), Uremide tablets (frusemide), Urid tablets (chlorthalidone), Urimor.
 Load-Date: July 20, 2007

 

End of Document


Mellor says drug dealers may forfeit their assets to state / Home Office official on the profits of crime
The Guardian (London)
April 18, 1985

 Copyright 1985 Guardian Newspapers Limited
Length: 325 words
Byline: By DAVID HENCKE, Social Services Correspondent
Body




 Criminals suspected of making millions of pounds by peddling hard drugs may forfeit their assets to the state unless they can prove they were acquired legally.
 Mr David Mellor, the junior Home Office minister in charge of drugs, said yesterday that he was considering switching the burden of proof from the prosecution to the defendant in hard drugs cases.
 His move follows a visit to the United States where the law insists that those who have made large sums of money from illegal drugs have to prove how they obtained their current assets.
The proposal will be considered in detail by an internal Home Office committee before final details emerge later this year.
 Mr Mellor said he was heartened by the possibility of all-party support for the measure including that of Labour MPs who sit on the Home Office select committee.
 He wants to combine this charge with greater powers to recall assets held by drugs criminals abroad. Already, Britain has sought access to bank accounts held in the Cayman Islands tax haven with the approval of the United States.
 Reciprocal arrangements with the United States will follow after concern that the Channel Islands might be used by American criminals to launder cash from illegal drug peddling.
 Mr Mellor expects that tougher measures will be needed to fight what he calls the twin sisters of destruction - heroin and cocaine - after growing evidence that the problem will worsen later this year.
 He said yesterday that the United States and Britain had found it very worrying that they had failed to stem the flow of heroin from Pakistan.
 Mr Mellor said he had been shocked by the extent of cocaine addiction in the United States. 'We need to dispel any myth that cocaine might not be as dangerous or addictive as heroin. I saw cases of people having to sniff cocaine every 10 minutes, they were so addicted to the drug. Every day in the United States it is estimated that another 5,000 people try the drug.'
 Load-Date: June 13, 2000

 

End of Document


VITAMIN SUPPLEMENT LINKED TO 12 DEATHS OF PREMATURE BABIES
The New York Times
April 13, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

 Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 432 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: ATLANTA, April 12
Body




At least 12 premature babies have died after being given a new intravenous Vitamin E supplement, and the product is being recalled, Federal health officials said today.
The Food and Drug Administration said at least 17 babies taking E-Ferol Aqueous Solution at three hospitals have become ill and 12 have died.
The national Centers for Disease Control here, reporting data from two of the hospitals, in Knoxville and Cincinnati, said 12 infants given E-Ferol all came down with an ''unusual syndrome'' that included fluid in the abdominal cavity. Eight of those infants died, the centers said.
Premature infants tend to have a deficiency of vitamin E at birth, and vitamin E ''is reported to have a therapeutic benefit,'' the centers reported.
 
2 Lots Sent Nationwide
The product was introduced in December. Faye Peterson, a spokesman for the drug agenacy in Rockville, Md., said two lots of the product had been distributed nationwide to 79 wholesalers and 78 hospital accounts.
''We have not gotten firm information on how much remains on the market,'' she said.
Use of E-Ferol does not appear to be widespread, said Dr. F. W. Rosa of the drug agency's Epidemiology Development Branch. Most neonatal centers he reached said they had only begun considering use of the product.
A voluntary recall by the drug agency and the distributor, O'Neal, Jones & Feldman of St. Louis, has begun, according to both Federal agencies. They ''recommend that E-Ferol not be used,'' the Centers for Disease Control said, referring to itself and the food and drug agency.
 
U.S. Approval Needed
WASHINGTON, April 12 - Bruce M. Brown, a Food and Drug Administration spokesman, said Federal law required companies to recieve prior approval from the agency to market a product if the label on the product made medical claims.
According to Mr. Brown, at least two of the claims on the vitamin preparation's label appear to fall within the legal definition of a medical claim. He said the label indicated the vitamin preparation could be used ''in conditions where the absorption of fats and fat solluable vitamins is impaired, as in liver, pancreatic, biliary disorder, sprue, colliac and other diarrheal diseases.''
Mr. Brown said the label also indicated the preapration could be used in ''treatment of anemia in premature and full-term infants caused by a deficiency in Vitamin E.''
He said the agency was still trying to determine whether the manufacturer was responsible for not seeking proper approval before marketing the preparation or if the label might have been changed by the distributor to make the medical claims.

 

End of Document


LOOKING FOR WEAKEST LINK
The New York Times
September 11, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

 Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 16, Column 4; Foreign Desk
Length: 245 words
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia
Body




While Colombia's new campaign has proved effective enough for United States officials to discount the need to apply new pressure on the Betancur Government, it has brought a fresh complication to the regional narcotics problem by decentralizing it.
It has therefore revived an age-old debate among drug-enforcement authorities over where the drug chain is most vulnerable.
Colombia's new campaign, under pressure from US Government, to eradicate drug trafficking has resulted in decentralization of problem; some drug-enforcement authorities recall that campaign against marijuana in Mexico stimulated culivation in Colombia but also note that campaign against heroin in Mexico reduced heroin availability in US until eradication of opium poppy in Mexico eased off in early 1980's (S)Some recall that the campaign against marijuana in Mexico merely stimulated cultivation in Colombia to satisfy the demand for the drug in the United States. Others argue that the campaign against heroin in Mexico did reduce heroin availability on United States streets until eradication of the opium poppy in Mexico eased off in the early 1980's.
But one longtime fighter in the region's drug wars suggested that only a combined approach could be effective.
''Eradication is one factor,'' he said. ''But education in the United States is as important. If we have a combination of eradication, education and enforcement, over 30 years we might solve the problem. Alone, none will be effective.''

 

End of Document


PENNSYLVANIA MEDICAL SOCIETY CONVENES ITS HOUSE OF DELEGATES TODAY
PR Newswire
October 21, 1988, Friday

 COPYRIGHT 1988 PR Newswire Association, Inc.
Length: 446 words
Dateline: PHILADELPHIA, Oct. 21
Body




PHILADELPHIA, Oct. 21 /PRN/ -- Eliminating defective drugs
and ineffective medicines are just two of more than 70 policy issues
that will be debated when the Pennsylvania Medical Society (PMS)
convenes its House of Delegates Friday-Sunday, Oct. 21-23, in
Philadelphia.
    Policymakers for the state's largest organization of physicians
will vote on a Philadelphia County Medical Society proposal
recommending that pharmacists place the manufacturer's expiration
date on all prescription labels. At particular risk are the elderly
who often take medications over long periods of time and unknowingly
take stale medicine which is no longer effective.
  Delegates will also discuss a resolution from the southcentral
Pennsylvania delegation which calls for the development of a legal
mechanism to immediately recall defectively manufactured drugs.
Currently, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration cannot demand
immediate recall.
    "I see this year's meeting focusing on public health problems," said Donald E. Harrop, M.D., president of the Society. "Of great
concern to the delegates is safeguarding today's high quality of
medicine. We must strive to keep quality up in the face of
bottom-line pressure from business and government to keep health
care costs down."
    The 300 delegates, representing 19,500 physicians from 60 county
medical societies in the state, will consider a resolution by the
Bucks County Medical Society recommending that pharmacists and
pharmacy owners discontinue the sale of cigarettes and other smoking
materials. Another proposal from Philadelphia calls for the
eventual ban of all tobacco advertising, and in the meantime,
enlarging the Surgeon General's warning to 25 percent of the total
advertisement.
    Also before the House will be proposals: recommending reform of
Pennsylvania's tort system to relieve the liability insurance
problem facing vaccine manufacturers; and instructing the Society to
lobby for legislation mandating seat belts on school buses.
    The meeting will be held at the Adam's Mark in Philadelphia.
This afternoon (Oct. 21), hearings will be held on all resolutions
submitted. The House will begin voting on these proposals on
Saturday morning, Oct. 22.
    On Saturday evening, the Society's 139th president, Dr. Gerald L.
Andriole, a urologist from Hazleton, will be installed. The meeting
concludes at noon on Sunday (Oct. 23)./
    
CONTACT -- Maureen Hoepfer for the Pennsylvania Medical Society,
800-228-7823, or at home, 717-944-7614.
 
 
gb
-- PH001 --
3734 10-21-88 09:00 EDT
 
<g, call
collect at 215-551-8487/
    
CONTACT -- Maureen Hoepfer for the Pennsylvania Medical Society,
800-228-7823, or at home, 717-944-7614.
 
 
gb
-- PH001 --
3734 10-21-88 09:00 EDT
 
<

 

End of Document


Reagan: Ambassadors Will Relay Get-Tough Message to Foreigners
The Associated Press
August 6, 1986, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1986 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 418 words
Byline: By MERRILL HARTSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ARLINGTON, Va.
Body




President Reagan said Wednesday he will ask U.S. ambassadors in drug-producing countries to serve notice on foreign officials that America is determined to stamp out drug abuse.
In a speech to the National Conference on Alcohol and Drug Abuse Prevention here, Reagan touted his new anti-drug-abuse offensive but said that its success depends to a large extent on getting young people involved.
Noting that the United States has been working with several foreign nations in recent years to interdict the flow of cocaine, heroin and other illegal drugs, the president said he will recall the ambassadors of drug-producing countries for consultations next month.
Reagan described those affected as ambassadors "from other countries which may face major drug production, transportation or consumption problems.""I will outline the steps we are taking to strike at the heart of this monster by curbing domestic demand, so they can take the message back with them," he said. "Together, all countries must send the message: No drug networks will remain alive. We mean to have a drug-free country, and the world should know we mean business.""It is clear that our domestic drug demand fuels international drug trafficking and cuts at the social, political and economic fabric of friendly countries," he said.
Reagan will meet next week with Mexican President Miguel de la Madrid, who will make a three-day state visit to Washington. White House spokesman Larry Speakes said the subject of drug interdiction certainly will be discussed.
U.S. law enforcement officials, led by Attorney General Edwin Meese, have met on several occasions with Mexican authorities in an attempt to curb the flow of illegal narcotics from that country. Meese held talks at the Justice Department last year with Sergio Garcia Ramirez, the attorney general of Mexico.
In his speech to the drug conference, Reagan said that "we mean to create an anti-drug environment in this country, an environment that will cast the scowl of disapproval on those who would use drugs and misuse alcohol."He said that "one of the joys of my presidency is getting to meet and know this generation of American youth. … It could well be that this generation will lead America out of the swamps of illegal drugs."The conference on drug abuse, involving more than 900 state and local officials and private citizens, was sponsored by the Department of Health and Human Services, the National Institute on Alcohol and Alcoholism and the National Institute on Drug Abuse.

 

End of Document


Reagan seeks diplomatic help in anti-drug crusade
United Press International
August 7, 1986, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1986 U.P.I.
Section: Washington News
Length: 386 words
Byline: By HELEN THOMAS , UPI White House Reporter
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




President Reagan, saying ''the world should know we mean business'' about eliminating drug use, has announced he will recall diplomats from major drug-producing nations for discussions on the problem.
Reagan made the announcement Wednesday in an address to the National Conference on Alcohol and Drug Abuse Prevention, which was meeting in the Washington suburb of Crystal City, Va.
''It is clear that our domestic drug demand fuels international drug trafficking and cuts at the social, political and economic fabric of friendly countries,'' he said.
''In September, I will be calling back for special consultations our ambassadors from other countries which may face major drug production, transportation or consumption problems.
''I will outline the steps we are taking to strike at the heart of this monster by curbing domestic demand so they can take the message back with them,'' he said. ''Together, all countries must send the message: No drug networks will remain alive.
''We mean to have a drug-free country and the world should know we mean business.''
Reagan launched his tough new drive Monday by advocating drug testing for federal workers in sensitive positions, and declared war against the use of cocaine, marijuana and heroin in the work place, schools, and entertainment business. The goal, he said, is for a drug-free generation.
He also said he and members of his Cabinet would agree to undergo such tests.
The new anti-drug push follows the five-year campaign of first lady Nancy Reagan to persuade youngsters to ''just say no'' to drugs.
In his Crystal City speech, Reagan again called on stars in the entertainment and sports worlds to join his war on drugs.
''I would hope that in the months ahead we will hear public expressions of support for those in the entertainment world who use their enormous influence, especially on the young, to oppose drugs.
''This is especially true of rock stars,'' he said, ''who should be encouraged to have courage and give a public thumbs down to drugs.
''Like rock stars,'' the president added, ''sports figures have a tremendous influence. I hope every athlete will reflect on the impressions he or she gives as a role model to young adoring fans.''
The use of illegal drugs and abuse of alcohol ''can no longer be shrugged off as somebody else's business,'' he said.

 

End of Document


Drug for treating AIDS-related infections recalled
United Press International
January 19, 1988, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1988 U.P.I.
Section: Domestic News
Length: 490 words
Byline: LARRY DOYLE; UPI Science Writer
Dateline: CHICAGO
Body




A drug company that makes two medications for AIDS patients has had to recall one of the drugs because of adverse reactions and has had serious questions raised about the manufacture of the other.
Officials for Lypho-Med said Monday they began recalling about 40,000 vials of the anti-fungal drug amphotericin B on Jan. 13 after the Food and Drug Administration voiced concern about fevers and chills seen in AIDS patients who received it.
Dr. John N. Kapoor, the company's chairman and president, ackowledges the FDA had cited the company for manufacturing a second AIDS medication, pentamidine, without permission at one plant, but characterized the problem as a misunderstanding.
Amphotericin is used to treat fungal diseases of the respiratory tract, swelling of the lymph glands and candidiasis, or chronic yeast infections of the skin, scalp, nails and other tissues. Candidiasis is frequently found in people with acquired immune deficiency syndrome.
But Lypho-Med's drug caused fevers and chills in one out of every 4,000 times administered, perhaps because of contaminated raw materials used in the generic product, Kapoor said. Lypho-Med will resume production of amphotericin ''when the specific cause is determined and the raw material problem resolved,'' he said.
But the Washington Drug Letter reported Monday that it was the third time in less than a year that Lypho-Med had come under FDA scrutiny for alleged violations of quality control and questions about its manufacture of drugs, including
The newsletter said amphoteracin included ingredients purchased from a Danish company that had products embargoed by the FDA last summer because the materials were not sterile.
In December, Lypho-Med recalled more than 55,000 vials of four other injectable drugs, because the FDA was not certain the products were sterile, the newsletter said. Inspections of two plants in the Chicago area alleged there were violations of the sterile and quality-control practices required by the agency.
Kapoor said Lypho-Med is continuing a recall of some lots of three drugs made at a Chicago plant that was closed in November. He added the closing of the 20-year-old facility was ''purely economic'' since the company has moved its manufacturing operations to a new plant in a Chicago suburb.
Despite the FDA's concerns, he said no contaminated drugs have been found from the old plant. ''We recalled them because there weren't very many, and we wanted to close the book on the old plant,'' he said.
The weekly said that during inspections last year, the FDA also cited the company for making Pentam 300, a form of pentamidine, in the newer plant without permission. Pentamidine is used to treat pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, the most common and deadly opportunistic infection plaguing people with AIDS.
Kapoor said there had been a misunderstanding with the FDA, and that the company had had permission to manufacture pentamidine at its older plant.

 

End of Document


State Trying to Shut Down 'Filthy' Pharmaceutical Plant
The Associated Press
August 28, 1984, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1984 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 400 words
Byline: By DEBORAH MESCE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: HARTFORD, Conn.
Body




The state is trying to close down a pharmaceutical company because of "filthy, putrid and unsanitary conditions," Connecticut's attorney general says.
The conditions inspectors found at A. & S. Pharmaceutical Corp. in Bridgeport included a bird's nest in a vent and bird feathers and excrement near the machinery used to manufacture aspirin tablets, according to a complaint filed in Bridgeport Superior Court.
The papers, filed last week, also allege that some aspirin tablets contained higher than allowed amounts of salicylic acid. They further allege that the company failed to analyze aspirin products returned because of defects, and sometimes redistributed the defective products if a "sniffing test" failed to detect an acidic odor.
Defective tablets have a strong vinegary odor or break apart easily, said William Ward, director of the Consumer Protection Department's drug control division.
The products are sold under the Certified, Sweet Life, Prescott and Topco labels, Attorney General Joseph Lieberman told a press conference Monday. Other plants around the country also manufacture aspirin products under those labels, he said.
The tablets pose no immediate danger to the public, but long-term use of aspirin with a higher than allowed acid content could cause stomach ulcers, he said.
Alan Neigher, an attorney for A. & S. Pharmaceutical, said the conditions at the plant were not as bad as were reported in the complaint.
"We're not saying the place was a hospital operating room, but the situation was nothing like that described by the state inspector," Neigher said.
Lieberman said the state will ask the court to close the plant and order a recall of the drug products it has manufactured at a hearing scheduled for Sept. 10, Lieberman said.
The basis for the civil complaint was a series of inspections in December 1983 and on April 11, 1984, Ward said.
The delay in filing the papers was due to laboratory testing of the products, which took several months, he said.
However, Neigher said that explanation is "untenable. If things were so bad, why did it take four months?" he said.
"If they had bothered to follow up their inspections, they would know that virtually everything they had asked for has been accomplished" since the April inspection, he said.
The company's license expired June 30 but is under renewal. A Sept. 6 hearing before the Consumer Protection Department has been set.

 

End of Document


House Members Urge Diplomatic Efforts On Drugs
The Associated Press
June 19, 1984, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1984 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 385 words
Byline: By ALAN FRAM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Reagan administration must make more vigorous diplomatic efforts to stop the flow of illegal drugs into the United States, members of a House committee said Tuesday.
The Select Committee on Narcotics Abuse and Control, which has toured some of the world's major drug-producing countries, issued a report also saying the American government should increase attempts to help foreign nations crack down on drug crop production.
The committee concluded that the overseas production of marijuana, heroin and cocaine has been increasing in recent years, despite American efforts to help reduce the size of foreign crops.
"It is the perception of this committee … that our failure in bringing the illicit production and traffic of narcotics … under control has been one of diplomacy," the committee's report said.
Rep. Charles Rangel, D-N.Y., the panel chairman, said the administration should more strongly enforce legislation passed last year that requires the president to suspend economic and military aid to countries not taking steps to eliminate illegal narcotics crops.
Rangel said Secretary of State George Shultz should confer with the foreign ministers of drug-producing countries, as well as with leaders of nations where the narcotics are sold, to discuss "diplomatic and economic steps" that could halt the problem.
And he said President Reagan should recall American ambassadors to drug-producing countries to convey to them the importance the United States places on stopping illicit narcotics operations.
"We have visited countries where we have been threatened by our own ambassadors not to bring up this sensitive subject for fear of offending the host country," Rangel said at a news conference.
He did not name any countries where such actions occurred.
The panel also recommended that the United States help Mexico, Jamaica, Peru, Bolivia and Colombia develop programs for taking aerial photographs of illegal crops.
The committee estimated that the value of illegal drugs in the United States increased from $50 billion in 1978 to $100 billion this year.
Large amounts of heroin are entering this country from Pakistan, Thailand, Italy and Mexico, the committee said. About 75 percent of the cocaine entering the United States is manufactured in Colombia out of coca paste smuggled from Peru and Bolivia.

 

End of Document


Johnson & Johnson Halts Sales of Painkiller, Citing Lagging Sales
The Associated Press
May 16, 1987, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1987 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 382 words
Dateline: NEW BRUNSWICK, N.J.
Body




Johnson & Johnson has suspended the sale of Suprol, citing lagging sales of the prescription painkiller that consumer groups and some members of Congress said was unnecessary and had caused kidney damage in some people.
The suspension came three days after the European Community acted to halt sales of Suprol and four days after Rep. Ted Weiss, D-N.Y., scheduled a hearing for later this month to review Suprol's 1985 approval by the Food and Drug Administration.
A spokesman for New Brunswick-based Johnson & Johnson, Lawrence G. Foster, said in a telephone interview from his home late Friday that the decision to suspend sales was not made because of the charges of kidney damage, but rather because of lagging sales.
"I'd like to emphasize, this is not recalling the drug," he said. "Sales have been lagging and we decided to suspend sales. The product on the market, we are urging people using it to continue using it as long as the supply lasts."
Foster, asked about Weiss' concern about possible kidney damage from the drug, said; "It would be erroneous to call it kidney damage. It has been called flank pain."
He said that once patients discontinued using the drug, the side effects ended.
Foster said sales were suspended "in the last week or so."
Weiss, chairman of the Government Operations Subcommittee on Human Resources and Intergovernmental Relations, said:
"The subcommittee's 16-month investigation raised serious questions about why the Food and Drug Administration approved Suprol for marketing. Until Johnson & Johnson voluntarily withdrew Suprol from the market, the United States was the only major country that had not banned the drug."
Weiss said his subcommittee's hearing would go on as scheduled.
"Our hearing will examine the basis for the FDA's refusal to withdraw this non-essential drug from the market in light of more than 300 cases of Suprol-induced kidney damage that have been reported in the United States," he said.
Another spokesman for Johnson & Johnson, James Murray, declined to reveal the sales figures for Suprol, which has been marketed by the company's Ortho Chemical and McNeil Pharmaceutical divisions.
The drug has been prescribed for menstrual pain and for sprains, bruises, twisted knees, dental pain from extractions and other mild and moderate pains.

 

End of Document


Judge Rules Against Generic Drug Makers
The Associated Press
January 21, 1981, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1981 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 466 words
Dateline: NEWARK, N.J.
Body




A federal judge dealt a major blow to generic drug manufacturers Wednesday by ruling a New Jersey business must submit to lengthy government tests before marketing low-cost versions of popular brand-name remedies.
An attorney for Premo Pharmaceutical Laboratories, Inc. of South Hackensack said the company would "almost definitely" appeal a ruling that its imitations were not identical to more expensive brand-name products.
Premo maintained it had marketed proven drugs after the brand-name manufacturers' patents expired.
But U.S. District Judge Frederick B. Lacey ruled that differences between brand-name and generic drugs were serious enough in one case to be fatal.
The decision upholds the right of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to ban marketing of generic drugs until extensive safety testing is completed, taking from five to 10 years.
Premo's president, Seymour Blackman, says the FDA is depriving the public of low-cost drugs.
Lacey held that varying inactive ingredients and manufacturing processes caused critical differences in the rate at which generic and brand-name products were absorbed into the body.
This could effectively cause an overdose, the judge said in a 130-page opinion.
Executive Assistant U.S. Attorney Charles Walsh had contended that doctors often believed errantly that imitations were equivalent to more expensive goods.
Lacey issued a preliminary injunction banning Premo from manufacturing or shipping eight drugs in interstate commerce.
An additional hearing will be scheduled to debate whether Premo should recall the eight drugs and destroy its stock.
Attorneys in the case said they regarded it as the most important decision in the dispute over testing generic drugs.
Blackman said his company will have to remove about 20 of its 52 drugs from the market as a result of the decision. The company had $18 million in revenue last year, he said.
Premo has filed suit at federal court for the District of Columbia charging FDA with delaying approval of his company's drugs beyond a 180-day deadline.
The eight drugs were: triamterene, which another manufacturer, Smith, Kline & French, uses as an ingredient of Dyazide, used in treating hypertension; trifluoperazine, which Smith, Kline & French uses as an ingredient of Stelazine, for treating psychotic disorders; Allopurinol tablets, sold as Zyloprim by Burroughs Wellcome for gout symptoms; chlorthalidone, sold as Hygroton by USV Pharmaceutical for hypertension; betamethasone valerate cream, marketed as Valisone by Schering Co. for skin disorders; doxylamine succinate, which Merrell-National Laboratories uses as an ingredient of Bendectin for morning sickness; and hydroxyzine pamoate, which Pfizer Pharmaceuticals sells as Vistaril, and hydroxizine hydrochloride, which Pfizer sells as Atarax, for anxiety.

 

End of Document


DRUG LINKED TO INFANT DEATHS RESULTS IN FEDERAL INDICTMENT
The New York Times
July 10, 1987, Friday, Late City Final Edition

 Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 419 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: WASHINGTON, July 9
Body




A Federal grand jury in St. Louis today accused a drug manufacturer, a distributor and three people of misrepresenting the safety and the effectiveness of a drug that was used in treating premature infants.
The indictment charged that the manufacturer had received reports, even as distribution of the drug continued, that ''several infants'' treated with it had died of symptoms associated with its use. Amy Brown, a Justice Department spokeswoman, said today that she could not confirm any infant deaths. However, as early as May 1984, Representative Ted Weiss, Democrat of New York and chairman of a House subcommittee that investigated the drug, reported that the Government had identified 38 such fatalities.
The indictment charged that the manufacturer and the distributor of the drug, E-Ferol Aqueous Solution, had known that it was potentially dangerous to the health of infants and that it had not been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for its intended use.
The indictment said that Carter-Glogau Laboratories Inc. of Phoenix, the manufacturer, and O'Neal, Jones and Feldman Inc. of St. Louis, the distributor, had ''developed, manufactured and marketed E-Ferol without any scientific testing to determine whether it was safe and effective for use in premature infants.''
Efforts to reach the defendants for response to the charges were unsuccessful.
 
Doctors Allegedly Misled
The indictment said that, despite the lack of testing, Carter-Glogau and O'Neal, Jones had indicated to physicians specializing in the care of premature infants and to other medical professionals that E-Ferol could be used to treat retrolental fibroplasia, a disease that can cause blindness in such babies.
According to the indictment, O'Neal, Jones sales representatives were told in October 1983 to say, if asked, that E-Ferol was approved by the Food and Drug Administration for intravenous use.
From November 1983 to April 1984, Carter-Glogau manufactured and shipped to O'Neal, Jones about 40,000 vials of E-Ferol, about 26,000 of which were distributed to doctors and hospitals nationwide, the indictment said. It was not until April 1984 that Carter-Glogau recalled the drug.
Charged in the indictment besides Carter-Glogau, which is now known as Retrac Inc., and O'Neal, Jones, now known as O'Neal Inc., were Ronald M. Carter Sr., former president of Carter-Glogau; Larry K. Hiland, former president and chief executive officer of O'Neal, Jones, and James B. Madison, former executive vice president of O'Neal, Jones.

 

End of Document


Judge Rules Against Generic Drug Makers
The Associated Press
January 21, 1981, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1981 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 522 words
Dateline: NEWARK, N.J.
Body




A federal judge dealt a major blow to generic drug manufacturers Wednesday by ruling a New Jersey business must submit to lengthy government reviews before marketing its low-cost versions of popular brand-name remedies.
An attorney for Premo Pharmaceutical Laboratories Inc. of South Hackensack, N.J. said the company would "almost definitely" appeal a ruling that its imitations were not identical to more expensive brand-name products.
Premo maintained it had marketed proven drugs after the brand-name manufacturers' patents expired.
But U.S. District Judge Frederick B. Lacey ruled that differences between brand-name and generic drugs were serious enough in one case to be fatal.
The decision upholds the right of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to ban marketing of generic drugs until extensive testing is completed, taking from five to 10 years.
Premo's president, Seymour Blackman, says the FDA is depriving the public of low-cost drugs.
Lacey held that varying inactive ingredients and manufacturing processes caused critical differences in the rate generic and brand-name products were absorbed into the body.
This could effectively cause an overdose, the judge said in a 130-page opinion.
Executive Assistant U.S. Attorney Charles Walsh had contended that doctors often believed errantly that the imitations were equivalent to the more expensive goods.
The judge said Premo had failed to test the rate drugs became effective on the patient, and that one remedy, triamterene, could be fatal if an overdose was ingested.
The drug, used to treat hypertension, could cause hyperkalemia, or a fatally high concentration of potassium in the bloodstream, according to the judge.
Lacey issued a preliminary injunction banning Premo from shipping or manufacturing eight drugs in interstate commerce.
An additional hearing will be scheduled to debate whether Premo should recall the eight drugs and destroy its stock.
The judge said the case's 5,400-page record of expert testimony was "perhaps the most detailed one developed to date in any case considering the generic-new drug issue."
Attorneys in the case regarded it as the most important decision in the dispute over testing generic drugs.
Blackman said his company will have to remove about 20 of its 52 drugs from the market as a result of the decision. The company had $18 million in revenue last year, he said.
Premo has filed suit at federal court for the District of Columbia charging FDA with delaying approval of his company's drugs beyond a 180-day deadline.
The eight drugs were: triamterene, or Dyazide, used in treating hypertension; tripfluoperozine, or Stelazine, for treating psychosis, both by Smith, Kline & French; allopurinol tablets, sold as Zyloprim by Burroughs Wellcome for gout symptoms; chlorthalidone, sold as Hygroton by USV Pharmaceuticals for hypertension; betamethasone vabrate cream, marketed as Valisone by Schering Co. for skin disorders; doxylamine succinate, marketed as Bendectin for morning sickness by Merrell-National Laboratories; and Pfizer Pharmaceuticals' Vistaril with hydroxyzine pamonte and Atarax with hydroxyzine hydrochloride for anxiety.

 

End of Document


Radioactive Polonium Leakage Found At Three More Plants
The Associated Press
February 10, 1988, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1988 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 563 words
Byline: By LEE BYRD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Federal officials said Wednesday they have found three more plants where a widely used industrial device leaked tiny particles of radioactive polonium, but "so far we've seen nothing that would pose a threat to public health."
There is no evidence of product contamination at any of the plants, now totaling 28, where leaks have been detected, according to spokesmen for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the Food and Drug Administration.
The problem involves an ionizing air gun, manufactured by the 3M Corp., used to control static electricity and remove dust from the air. About 2,000 of the devices were recalled from food, drug and cosmetic plants over the weekend, after NRC inspectors confirmed several instances in which the guns leaked tiny ceramic spheres containing polonium 210.
In all 28 cases reported so far, officials said, it appeared the particles fell harmlessly to the floor and did not contaminate any items, ranging from beer to baby formula, on the production lines. Nor was there any serious threat to plant workers, they said.
The FDA and various state agencies, however, initiated a crash product inspection program, and several plants were closed temporarily for the review. Most have re-opened.
The latest plants where leaks were found include two photo labs, Cress in Pawtucket, R. I., and Photofinish in McCall, S.C., and a Block Drugs plant in Humacao, Puerto Rico, which makes shampoo, according to Robert Newlin of the NRC.
Polonium 210, a naturally occuring decay product of radium, emits alpha particles incapable of penetrating the skin. Though it could prove a health threat if ingested in sufficient amounts, the material used in the air gun is surrounded by a protective ceremic shell that, if intact, would pass safely through the body, officials said. Still, they expressed some concern over the possibility that some of the shells could be crushed or cracked, allowing more radiation to escape.
FDA Commissioner Frank Young said one of the particles, if ingested into a lung and absorbed there, would yield about 4 rem of radiation. As a comparison, the average cigarette smoker naturally absorbs about 6 rem of polonium radiation a year, he said.
Following disclosure of the leaks, the Arizona Health Department sought a recall of some Coca-Cola products and some baby formulas made at plants which used the suspect ionizing gun.
But Dave Duarte, an FDA spokesman, said Wednesday that "We have not found any products to be contaminated. So far we've seen nothing that would pose a threat to the public health. We do not feel that any recall is warranted."
Although nonradioactive devices are available, air guns using polonium 210 have become increasingly popular since being licensed by the NRC in 1964. About 20,000 of the 3M models are in use, and only those at plants producing food, drugs or cosmetics have been recalled.
NRC and 3M officials were scheduled to meet in Glen Ellyn, Ill., on Thursday over issues surrounding the failure of the devices. NRC officials said earlier they were investigating evidence that company records showed as many as one percent of the guns failed an annual test, while 3M reported a failure rate of 0.03 percent, apparently after discounting for models damaged in use.
Hugh Thompson, head of the agency's nuclear safety office, said that "In my view, on these type of devices you should have no failures."

 

End of Document


Caller Brags Reward 'Isn't Enough' In Tainted Capsule Case
The Associated Press
March 25, 1986, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1986 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 401 words
Dateline: PHILADELPHIA
Body




A man claiming to have poisoned three over-the-counter medications called a Philadelphia television station and said the reward money wasn't enough to capture him.
The call was made to WCAU on Monday after the Proprietary Association, a group of drug manufacturers, raised to $900,000 the reward for information leading to convictions of people who tamper with drugs.
Meanwhile, technicians for the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and the FBI continued examining capsules of Contac, Dietac and Teldrin for contaminants.
Traces of warfarin, a blood thinner used in rat poison, were discovered in nine capsules of the drugs last week. The discovery prompted an $8 million recall Friday by the drugs' manufacturer, Philadelphia-based SmithKline Beckman Corp.
In calls last week to the company and the media, a man calling himself "Gary" said he tampered with the drugs in four cities _ Orlando, Fla., Houston, St. Louis and Chicago _ to force SmithKline to stop producing capsules.
WCAU spokesman Martin Blair said a caller on Monday told Bonnie Jacobs, a producer, "This is Gary. Your $900,000 isn't enough. I'll take more."
Blair said the call was not recorded and that it was not clear whether the caller was the same "Gary" who phoned SmithKline last week. Jacobs called the FBI, which took a statement from her, Blair said.
Jacobs, 25, said the caller sounded "young, very calm and didn't sound like a wacko." Past descriptions of "Gary's" voice have said he was calm and sounded like someone in his late 20s or early 30s.
FBI spokesman Lane Bonner in Washington would not comment on the call.
"I can only say that the investigation is being conducted with Food and Drug and given the highest priority," he said.
FDA officals examined 35,000 capsules as of Monday, including an undetermined number that have been turned over to the FBI.
The Proprietary Association added $700,000 to the $200,000 in reward money offered by Johnson & Johnson in the Tylenol poisonings.
A suburban New York woman died last month after taking two Tylenol capsules laced with cyanide. In 1982, seven people died in the Chicago area after taking poisoned Tylenol capsules.
John Walden, executive director the trade group, said the association hopes the size of the reward spurs some activity. "The only solution is to catch these people," he said.
SmithKline is liable for a share of the reward as a member of the Proprietary Association.

 

End of Document


LIFELINE
USA TODAY
July 25, 1989, Tuesday, FINAL EDITION

 Copyright 1989 Gannett Company Inc.
Section: LIFE; Pg. 1D; Lifeline
Length: 367 words
Byline: Tom Gliatto
Body




DRUG RECALL: Par Pharmaceutical Inc. has recalled its generic version of the high-blood-pressure drug Maxzide because it said company employees misrepresented samples of the drug submitted for inspection to the Food and Drug Administration. The agency's concern: Effectivness, not safety, of the drug. Par also has suspended sales of an FDA-approved generic anti-convulsant and a muscle relaxant while investigations into them continue.
TALE OF THE TAPE: ABC News executive Richard Wald defended the use of re-enactments, but said the network made ''a terrible mistake'' Monday by failing to label staged photos on a World News Tonight story Friday about U.S. diplomat Felix Bloch, under investigation for spying. ABC simulated footage that might have looked to viewers like videotaped frames of Bloch giving a briefcase to a Soviet agent. Trailing Bloch, 1A
 
 WORD FROM THE BOSS: The Parents Music Resource Center, the group that wants warning labels for raunchy records, is re-editing a promotional videotape to cut a fabricated quote from Bruce Springsteen. The PMRC got the Springsteen statement - about the corrupting powers of today's music - from a 1988 Reader's Digest article. The magazine subsequently determined that the quote was false and, in a letter of apology to Springsteen, said the researcher on the article had been fired.
 
 TECH TEST: A new, federally funded study of 8,000 female office workers will try to resolve persistent questions over the health effects of video display terminals. The two-year, $ 2 million study by Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, will be conducted in Boston, Cleveland, New York and an as-yet-undetermined California city. The study comes in the wake of a recent report, calling for more research, by the Office of Technology Assessment.
 
 FERRE IMPRESSIVE: Italian designer Gianfranco Ferre took the arrogant world of French haute couture by storm Monday in his first fashion show as chief designer at Christian Dior. Ferre, a former architect, used the strong lines, gorgeous fabrics and simple shapes at Dior that put him on the map in Italy. The French may be taking it hard, but 1992 - when trade barriers among West European countries disappear - has come to high fashion.
 
 VIDEO DRONES: Paula Abdul and Bobby Brown are among the entertainers scheduled to perform on the 1989 MTV Video Awards Sept. 6. Bon Jovi leader Jon Bon Jovi and band member Richie Sambora - he who has been seen in public with Cher - are going to do an acoustic number, which is a bit like saying Van Cliburn is going to do Great Balls of Fire! Arsenio Hall is the host.
 Graphic



 
PHOTO; color, Michael Grecco, Outline (Jon Bon Jovi)
 
CUTLINE: BON JOVI: He'll play at MTV awards.

 

End of Document


PEOPLE - CHEMICALS
Journal of Commerce

 Copyright 1988 The Journal of Commerce, Inc.
Section: CHEMICALS/PLASTICS, Pg. 9B
Length: 268 words
Body




BASF CORP. (Parsipanny, N.J.) - Dieter J. Stein will become president and chief executive officer of BASF Corp., the North American arm of the BASF group on May 1.
On July 1 he will become chairman.
 In January 1988, he was appointed to the board of executive directors BASF G, the parent group of the BASF group.
Mr. Stein joined BASF Plastics Laboratory in 1963. In 1970 he headed research in polystyrene, PVC and rubber. He was appointed deputy department manager in 1976, put in charge of polyolefin research and in 1979 the polypropylene product team as well. In 1980 he became director of the central personnel department. Mr. Stein had been director of the Coatings Operating division since 1983 and concurrently chairman of BASF Farben and Lacke AG.
ZENITH LABORATORIES INC. (Ramsey, N.J.) - The president and chief executive has resigned at the request of the board after the generic drug company posted a $ 12 million loss on $ 43.2 million in sales last year. James O. Leonard was succeeded by Larry Weber, of Larry Weber Associates, a consulting company that specializes in acquisitions, divestitures and mergers in the pharmaceutical industry, Zenith said.
Zenith also is renegotiating its loans with a bank group after the company's net worth fell beneath the covenant in the loan agreement, Zenith Chairman John Farber said.
Zenith Laboratories was hit financially after it recalled several generic drugs in August 1986 pending a review by the Federal Drug Administration of unapproved formulas. The FDA later approved the manufacturing site and the redistribution of the drugs.
People - CHEMICALS. BRIEFS
 Graphic



 
ILLUSTRATION: PHOTO
 Load-Date: January 7, 1997

 

End of Document


Cold Medicine Recalled
The Associated Press
January 1, 1988, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1988 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 204 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The government says more than 100,000 bottles of potentially mislabeled cold medicines could contain instead a dangerous tranquilizer and are being recalled.
The Food and Drug Administration said Thursday that the tranquilizer, haloperidol, could be fatal, especially to children, if taken in the amounts normally safe with over-the-counter cold medicines.
The FDA said My-K Laboratories of Morton Grove, Ill., is recalling all four-ounce bottles of its cold medicine bearing lot number 15718 with an expiration date of 12/88.
The bottles, all 105,000 of which bear the same lot number and expiration date, were sold under the following brand names:
_Myfed Syrup, distributed to military and civilian stores.
_Life-Line Trifed Syrup, distributed by Life-Line Pharmaceutical of Hayward, Calif.
_URL Uni-Fed Syrup, distributed by United Research Laboratories of Philadelphia.
_Walgreen Wal-Act Syrup, distributed by Walgreen Co. of Deerefield, Ill.
_Osco Aphedrid Syrup, distributed by Osco Drug Inc. of Oak Brook, Ill.
The mixup was discovered when a 6-year-old boy became lethargic after taking what he believed to be cold medicine at Fort Bragg, N.C., and subsequently had to be hospitalized. He is recovering at home, officials said.

 

End of Document


U.S. Detects Radioactive Leaks at 3 More Plants
The New York Times
February 11, 1988, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

 Copyright 1988 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 587 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Feb. 10
Body




Federal officials said today that they had found three more plants where a widely used industrial device leaked tiny particles of radioactive polonium, but added, ''So far we've seen nothing that would pose a threat to public health.''
There is no evidence of product contamination at any of the plants, now totaling 28, where leaks have been detected, according to spokesmen for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the Food and Drug Administration.
The problem involves an ionizing air gun, manufactured by the 3M Corporation, used to control static electricity and remove dust from the air. About 2,000 of the devices were recalled from food, drug and cosmetic plants over the weekend, after commission inspectors confirmed several instances in which the guns leaked tiny ceramic spheres containing polonium 210.
No Serious Threat to Workers
In all 28 cases reported so far, officials said, it appeared the particles fell harmlessly to the floor and did not contaminate any items, ranging from beer to baby formula, on the production lines. Nor was there any serious threat to plant workers, they said.
The drug agency and various state agencies, however, initiated a crash product inspection program, and several plants were closed temporarily for the review. Most have re-opened.
The latest plants where leaks were found include two photo laboratories, Cress in Pawtucket, R.I., and Photofinish in McCall, S.C., and a Block Drugs plant in Humacao, P.R., which makes shampoo, according to Robert Newlin of the regulatory commission.
Polonium 210, a naturally occurring decay product of radium, emits alpha particles incapable of penetrating the skin. Though it could prove a health threat if ingested in sufficient amounts, the material used in the air gun is surrounded by a protective ceremic shell that, if intact, would pass safely through the body, officials said. Still, they expressed some concern over the possibility that some of the shells could be crushed or cracked, allowing more radiation to escape.
 
Impact of Polonium 210
The Commissioner of Food and Drugs, Frank Young, said one of the particles, if ingested into a lung and absorbed there, would yield about 4 rem of radiation. As a comparison, the average cigarette smoker naturally absorbs about 6 rem of polonium radiation a year, he said.
Following disclosure of the leaks, the Arizona Health Department sought a recall of some Coca-Cola products and some baby formulas made at plants that used the ionizing gun.
But today Dave Duarte, an F.D.A. spokesman, said: ''We have not found any products to be contaminated. So far we've seen nothing that would pose a threat to the public health. We do not feel that any recall is warranted.''
Although nonradioactive devices are available, air guns using polonium 210 have become increasingly popular since being licensed by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission in 1964. About 20,000 of the 3M models are in use, and only those at plants producing food, drugs or cosmetics have been recalled.
Commission and 3M officials were scheduled to meet Thursday in Glen Ellyn, Ill., over issues surrounding the failure of the devices. Commission officials said earlier that they were investigating evidence that company records showed as many as 1 percent of the guns failed an annual test, while 3M reported a failure rate of 0.03 percent, apparently after discounting for models damaged in use.
Hugh Thompson, head of the agency's nuclear safety office, said, ''In my view, on these type of devices you should have no failures.''

 

End of Document


Maker: Product May Have Been Marketed Without Full Test But It's Safe
The Associated Press
June 30, 1989, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 671 words
Byline: By DEBORAH MESCE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A New York generic drug manufacturer said Friday that one of its products may have been marketed for more than a year without having been fully tested but added that it believes the recently recalled drug is safe.
A congressman, however, said the case raises questions about the drug's safety as well as the government's drug approval process.
Roger W. Jordan, president of Vitarine Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Springfield Gardens, N.Y., said his company has been cooperating with a Food and Drug Administration investigation into the approval of Vitarine's version of Dyazide, a widely prescribed drug to treat high blood pressure.
Vitarine recalled its product a month ago. At least three employees have been suspended, the company said.
"We reported our findings to the FDA, that we had reason to suspect that doubts were raised relative to the original study," in which Vitarine's drug was to be compared with Dyazide made by SmithKline Beckman Corp., its originator, Jordan said.
The House Energy and Commerce investigations subcommitee alleged that Vitarine, instead of using its own drug for comparison tests with the original drug, substituted Dyazide for its product. As a result, a sample of Dyazide was tested against another sample of Dyazide and the Vitarine sample was never measured against the original, the panel said.
"It would appear that that is the case," Jordan said.
However, he said, preliminary results of a just-completed comparison study measuring the rate and extent of absorption of the two drugs shows that Vitarine's product falls within an "acceptable range."
"Vitarine has no reason to expect any safety or efficacy problems with this product. Vitarine has produced millions of dosage units since the product was first introduced in February 1988 and as of this date has received only six adverse experience reports," all of which were reported to the FDA, he said.
Rep. John Dingell, D-Mich., subcommittee chairman, said: "That such a simple but apparently effective fraud could have gone undetected raises some serious new questions about the safety and efficacy of these drugs, and about the law."
"Events suggest that we can no longer be assured that the products tested are the products marketed," he said.
The FDA acknowledged that it is investigating the company, but spokesman Jeff Nesbit said he couldn't comment on the inquiry or address the safety of the Vitarine drug.
An FDA source, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said the agency doubted the generic version was unsafe because it had undergone other tests and no problems with people using it had been reported.
Dyazide, made by SmithKline Beckman Corp., is one of the most widely prescribed drugs in the country.
Before its first generic competition appeared in 1987, sales were more than $$300 million annually. However, when the Copiague, N.Y.-based Bolar Pharmaceutical put its generic version on the market, SmithKline's Dyazide sales dropped 45 percent, to $$200 million in 1988, said Jeremy Heymsfeld, a spokesman at SmithKline's Philadelphia headquarters.
The subcommittee asked Pharmakinetics of Baltimore, Md., the lab that conducted the tests comparing Vitarine's product and Bolar's version with the SmithKline original, to hold all samples of all three drugs.
The panel also asked the FDA to arrange to have those samples tested, as well as a representative sampling of other prescription drugs that underwent testing at the lab to determine whether other generic drug companies may have submitted false test samples.
Mark Perkal, executive vice president of Pharmakinetics, said the company was cooperating with the FDA and that there was no way the lab would have known whether a company submitted false test samples.
"We're not in the business to detect fraud," he said. "You would have to have very sophisticated capabilities to detect something like that, and we had no inkling something like that would be occuring."
The comparison studies are key to the FDA's approval of a generic, lower-cost version of a prescription drug.

 

End of Document


Maker: Product May Have Been Marketed Without Full Test But It's Safe
The Associated Press
June 30, 1989, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 671 words
Byline: By DEBORAH MESCE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A New York generic drug manufacturer said Friday that one of its products may have been marketed for more than a year without having been fully tested but added that it believes the recently recalled drug is safe.
A congressman, however, said the case raises questions about the drug's safety as well as the government's drug approval process.
Roger W. Jordan, president of Vitarine Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Springfield Gardens, N.Y., said his company has been cooperating with a Food and Drug Administration investigation into the approval of Vitarine's version of Dyazide, a widely prescribed drug to treat high blood pressure.
Vitarine recalled its product a month ago. At least three employees have been suspended, the company said.
"We reported our findings to the FDA, that we had reason to suspect that doubts were raised relative to the original study," in which Vitarine's drug was to be compared with Dyazide made by SmithKline Beckman Corp., its originator, Jordan said.
The House Energy and Commerce investigations subcommitee alleged that Vitarine, instead of using its own drug for comparison tests with the original drug, substituted Dyazide for its product. As a result, a sample of Dyazide was tested against another sample of Dyazide and the Vitarine sample was never measured against the original, the panel said.
"It would appear that that is the case," Jordan said.
However, he said, preliminary results of a just-completed comparison study measuring the rate and extent of absorption of the two drugs shows that Vitarine's product falls within an "acceptable range."
"Vitarine has no reason to expect any safety or efficacy problems with this product. Vitarine has produced millions of dosage units since the product was first introduced in February 1988 and as of this date has received only six adverse experience reports," all of which were reported to the FDA, he said.
Rep. John Dingell, D-Mich., subcommittee chairman, said: "That such a simple but apparently effective fraud could have gone undetected raises some serious new questions about the safety and efficacy of these drugs, and about the law."
"Events suggest that we can no longer be assured that the products tested are the products marketed," he said.
The FDA acknowledged that it is investigating the company, but spokesman Jeff Nesbit said he couldn't comment on the inquiry or address the safety of the Vitarine drug.
An FDA source, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said the agency doubted the generic version was unsafe because it had undergone other tests and no problems with people using it had been reported.
Dyazide, made by SmithKline Beckman Corp., is one of the most widely prescribed drugs in the country.
Before its first generic competition appeared in 1987, sales were more than $$300 million annually. However, when the Copiague, N.Y.-based Bolar Pharmaceutical put its generic version on the market, SmithKline's Dyazide sales dropped 45 percent, to $$200 million in 1988, said Jeremy Heymsfeld, a spokesman at SmithKline's Philadelphia headquarters.
The subcommittee asked Pharmakinetics of Baltimore, Md., the lab that conducted the tests comparing Vitarine's product and Bolar's version with the SmithKline original, to hold all samples of all three drugs.
The panel also asked the FDA to arrange to have those samples tested, as well as a representative sampling of other prescription drugs that underwent testing at the lab to determine whether other generic drug companies may have submitted false test samples.
Mark Perkal, executive vice president of Pharmakinetics, said the company was cooperating with the FDA and that there was no way the lab would have known whether a company submitted false test samples.
"We're not in the business to detect fraud," he said. "You would have to have very sophisticated capabilities to detect something like that, and we had no inkling something like that would be occuring."
The comparison studies are key to the FDA's approval of a generic, lower-cost version of a prescription drug.

 

End of Document


Pill amnesty promotes safe medicine use
Messenger - Weekly Times
May 31, 1989 Wednesday

 Copyright 1989 Nationwide News Pty Limited
Length: 400 words
Body




MANY household medicine chests hold a lethal cocktail of unused prescription drugs, Parks Community Health Centre staff warn.
 Together with chemists in the area the centre has declared a pill amnesty aimed at local elderly and lasting until the end of July.
 The campaign "Safe Use of Medicines by the Elderly" has been developed by the Parks Community Advisory Committee and centre community development officer Leanne Goodes.
From the middle of next month people can take old and unused drugs to certain local chemist shops.
 The program aims to raise community awareness of dangers relating to improper use of medications.
 Ms Goodes said the committee, whose members all live around the community centre, was concerned that many elderly people were using old drugs in combination with their current medications.
 "We've become aware that a lot of elderly people have suitcases full of old pills and we decided as a committee to do something about it," Ms Goodes said.
 "It's to be a multi-pronged campaign. Anyone who makes an appointment with one of the centre's doctors will be asked to bring their old and current medicines in with them.
 "We've got the drug recall and will also be visiting local senior citizens' clubs and doctors' surgeries to tell them about what we're doing."
 The program is being funded by the Drug and Alcohol Services,
MP Murray De Laine and some local pharmacies.
 She said many elderly people had to take more than one type of pill a day and some became confused over what they should take and when.
 "Sometimes they get them mixed up, or begin taking old medications again, which can have very serious side effects," Ms Goodes said.
 The community advisory committee will review the program at the end of three months.
 For more details phone Leanne Goodes at Parks Community Health Centre on 243 5648.
THE following pharmacies will receive old and unused medicines as part of the Parks Community Health Centre's Safe Use of Medications by the Elderly campaign:
 David Ardrill, 125 Ridley Gve, Ferryden Park.
 Kim Phuong Tran, 60a Hanson Rd, Woodville Gardens.
 John Cracknell, 68 Hanson Rd, Woodville Gardens.
 Yon Fun Wong, 96 Wilson St, Mansfield Park.
 Felice Di Fiore, 159 Grand Junction Rd, Ottoway.
 Wayne Miller, Carrigs Pharmacy, Arndale Shopping Centre.
 Trevor Stratton, Strattons Pharmacy, Arndale Shopping Centre.
 The Parks Community Health Centre, Trafford St, Angle Park.
 Graphic



 
photo: teresa bowden; Ferryden Park resident Teresa Bowden throws away a bottleof old pills as part of the Parks Community Health Centre'spill amnesty.
 Load-Date: September 23, 2003

 

End of Document


SCHWAB'S BECOMES PART OF THE HOLLYWOOD LEGEND
Herald
October 14, 1988 Friday

 Copyright 1988 Nationwide News Pty Limited
Length: 383 words
Byline: HISCOCK J
Body




LOS ANGELES, THURSDAY Schwab's Pharmacy, the famous Hollywood drug store where, legend has it, film goddess Lana Turner was discovered, is being pulled down to make way for a shopping complex.
 The old soda fountain went under the wrecking ball as a former Glenn Miller Band saxophonist played Auld Lang Syne and a handful of old friends stopped by to say goodbye to the business that was a second home to hundreds of actors, both famous and unknown.
 President Reagan, a former regular customer, sent a telegram to the owner, Leon Schwab, saying: "Remember, Leon, the only running I did in those days was for casting calls. Thanks for your moral support and encouragement." The message was signed "Nancy and the Gipper".
Schwab, who opened the pharmacy in 1935, was there to recall stories about the drug store in its heydey.
 This was a time when Charlie Chaplin and Paulette Goddard made their own milk shakes after closing time; when he lent many budding stars, including a young Ronald Reagan, money and food to keep them afloat while pursuing their acting careers; when Gloria Swanson shopped for make-up at the store and Humphrey Bogart once asked Schwab for something to cure a hangover.
 Schwab told him: "Stop drinking." Bogart retorted: "I want a cure, not a lecture." Although Lana Turner has since denied the story that she was discovered at the soda fountain, Schwab swears it is true.
 Joe Seide, a Hollywood publicist and long-time customer, recalled: "All those movie stars weren't discovered at Schwab's because they were seen there, but because Leon picked up the telephone.
 "All the studio heads had their prescriptions filled there and their cheques cashed and their milk shakes made. So when Leon saw someone of star material, they heard about it." A glamorised version of the old drug store will be included in the new shopping complex, but Schwab knows the old days will never return.
 "You can't change things back to what you had then," he said wistfully. "Today you don't know a movie star when you see one. They are in one movie and that's that.
 "It's not like when you saw Charles Laughton, and he'd be there on the screen for years and years.If the new ones walked in now I wouldn't recognise 90 per cent of them." DAILY TELEGRAPH
 END OF STORY
 Graphic



 
LANA TURNER: STORY HAS IT SHE WAS DISCOVERED AT SCHWAB'S SODA FOUTAINHUMPHREY BOGART: ASKED SCHWAB FOR A HANGOVER CURE. "GIVE UP DRINKING." HEADVISED
 Load-Date: September 20, 2003

 

End of Document


3M Corp. Expands Its Halt To Use Of Static Devices After Radiation Leaks
The Associated Press
February 12, 1988, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1988 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 448 words
Dateline: GLEN ELLYN, Ill.
Body




The 3M Corp. says it is voluntarily recalling more of its static eliminators because a small number of the ionizing air guns have been found to be leaking radioactive particles.
Tiny pellets containing the radioactive element polonium have been found at 28 manufacturing plants where the static eliminator guns are used, and have been traced to failures in the devices. Regulators say they have found no evidence of product contamination at any of the plants.
3M officers discussed the matter with Nuclear Regulatory Commission officials Thursday at a meeting in this Chicago suburb.
The guns are used to control static electricity and remove dust from the air in high-purity industries, such as clean rooms for electronics, said Robert Bernero, deputy director of the NRC's office of nuclear material safety and safeguards.
About 2,000 of the devices were recalled from food, drug and cosmetic plants last weekend after NRC inspectors confirmed several instances in which the guns leaked tiny ceramic spheres containing the isotope polonium 210.
That recall involved four models, said Robert Wissink, 3M's manager of health physics services.
Company officials said Thursday they had decided voluntarily to ask their customers to temporarily stop using eight to 10 other models which also use polonium 210. Those models also are used in the food, beverage, cosmetic and pharmaceutical industries, Wissink and Bernero said.
Both officials stressed the company had no evidence of any problems with leaks from the models temporarily withdrawn from use Thursday.
"We're doing this on the basis of prudence _ not because of any health and safety issues," Wissink said.
Bernero also reiterated the NRC's previous statements that the radioactive leaks from the static eliminators haven't created a significant health hazard.
3M officials said they had hired an independent laboratory to test the devices in an effort to find out what caused the leaks, Bernero said.
Polonium 210, a naturally occurring decay product of radium, emits alpha particles too weak to penetrate the skin. Though it could prove a health threat if ingested in sufficient amounts, the material in the air guns is surrounded by a protective ceramic shell that, if intact, would pass safely through the body, officials said.
Regulators were concerned about the possibility that some of the shells could be crushed or cracked, allowing more radioactive particles to escape.
FDA Commissioner Frank Young said one of the spheres, if ingested into a lung and absorbed there, would yield about 4 rem of radiation. As a comparison, the average cigarette smoker naturally absorbs about 6 rem of polonium radiation a year from the tobacco, he said.

 

End of Document


3M Expands Market Withdrawal Of Static Devices After Radiation Leaks
The Associated Press
February 12, 1988, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1988 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 467 words
Dateline: GLEN ELLYN, Ill.
Body




Minnesota Mining & Manufacturing Co. told federal regulators Thursday it was voluntarily widening a market withdrawal of its static eliminator devices because of radioactive leaks in a small number of them.
Officials of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and 3M, which makes an ionizing air gun that leaked tiny particles of radioactive polonium, met in this Chicago suburb to discuss the problem.
Radioactive leaks caused by failures in some of the devices have been found at 28 manufacturing plants where the static eliminator guns are used, but regulators have found no evidence of product contamination at any of them.
The ionizing air gun is used to control static electricity and remove dust from the air in high-purity industries, such as clean rooms for electronics, said Robert Bernero, deputy director of the NRC's office of nuclear material safety and safeguards.
About 2,000 devices were recalled from food, drug and cosmetic plants over the weekend after NRC inspectors confirmed several instances in which the guns leaked tiny ceramic spheres containing radioactive polonium 210.
That recall involved four models, said Robert Wissink, 3M's manager of health physics services.
But 3M officials said Thursday they had decided voluntarily to ask their customers to temporarily stop using eight to 10 other models with the polonium 210 that are used in the food, beverage, cosmetic and pharmaceutical industries, Wissink and Bernero said.
Both officials said the company had no evidence of problems with the other models.
"We're doing this on the basis of prudence _ not because of any health and safety issues," Wissink said.
Bernero also reiterated the NRC's previous statements that the radioactive leaks from the static eliminators haven't posed a significant health hazard.
During Thursday's meeting, 3M officials said they had hired an independent laboratory to test the devices in an effort to find out what has caused the failure, Bernero said.
Another meeting has been set for Feb. 19 to continue discussing the problem and exchange the government's own test data, he said.
Polonium 210, a naturally occurring decay product of radium, emits alpha particles incapable of penetrating the skin. Though it could prove a health threat if ingested in sufficient amounts, the material used in the air gun is surrounded by a protective ceramic shell that, if intact, would pass safely through the body, officials said.
But regulators are concerned about the possibility that some of the shells could be crushed or cracked, allowing more radiation to escape.
FDA Commissioner Frank Young said one of the particles, if ingested into a lung and absorbed there, would yield about 4 rem of radiation. As a comparison, the average cigarette smoker naturally absorbs about 6 rem of polonium radiation a year, he said.

 

End of Document


FDA Investigating Maker of Blood Pressure Drug
The Associated Press
January 24, 1980, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1980 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 380 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The manufacturer of Selacryn, a drug used for treating high blood pressure, is being investigated for an alleged delay in reporting illnesses suffered by patients who used it, the government said today.
The drug was recalled after its association with five deaths. Wayne Pines, spokesman for the Food and Drug Administration, said Smith Kline & French, the Philadelphia-based company, may have unlawfully postponed telling the agency that some Selacryn patients had suffered liver damage.
"There is a regulation that requires firms to report to FDA unexpected aftereffects from new drugs within 15 days. It appears to us that SKF may have violated this regulation. We are investigating the facts and are preparing a letter to SKF asking it for a full explanation," Pines said.
A spokesman for the partent SmithKline Corp. said it had "acted responsibly" in reporting side effects of Selacryn, and that the FDA had agreed in a statement issued last week.
The company recalled all stocks of the drug Jan. 16 after a consultation with the FDA. Its data showed 52 cases of liver damage, including 30 cases of jaundice among the 300,000 persons who had taken the drug. Five deaths also were reported.
Selacryn, which has the generic name ticrynafen, is a comparatively new drug which has been on the market only since last May.
FDA disclosed its investigation shortly after a consumer group appealed to FDA Commissioner Jere Goyan to seek criminal penalties against the company.
Sidney Wolfe, director of Public Citizen Health Research Group, said the failure to make prompt reports "has probably resulted in a number of needless deaths." He described SKF's alleged behavior as an example of "corporate white collar crime."
Violation of FDA's reporting laws carries a maximum penalty of a $10,000 fine and three years in prison if there is intent to defraud or mislead, Wolfe said.
The illness reports were made in November. But FDA is only now initiating its investigation.
Selacryn has been used to treat high blood pressure and edema, or water retention, as well as gout.
The company has notified physicians and pharmacists throughout the country of the recall. The FDA has advised persons taking Selacryn to consult their doctors before discontinuing its use. Other drug treatments are available.

 

End of Document


FDA Says Review of Generic Drugs Has Resulted in One Recall
The Associated Press
October 3, 1989, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 196 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Food and Drug Administration said Tuesday its continuing review of the 30 top-selling generic drugs has resulted so far in the recall of one drug.
Pharmaceutical Basics Inc. of Denver recalled its antifungal nystatin tablets because they were found to be below potency, the FDA said.
Five other companies have recalled drugs since the FDA began investigating allegations of fraud and corruption within its generic drug division and among some generic drug makers. None of the recalled drugs has posed a major safety problem, the FDA said.
The FDA said the Sept. 27 recall by Pharmaceutical Basics was "the first recall" stemming from the testing. It did not say whether further recalls would be required.
The FDA said it has analyzed 1,827 samples of the 30 leading generics for potency, dissolution, composition and other specifications, and nearly all were found to be within acceptable specifications.
About 1.6 percent of the samples were found to be deficient in potency or dissolution, which the FDA said is about the rate it usually finds under normal industry conditions.
The agency said it has more testing to do and the findings would be released at the end of the month.

 

End of Document


Business and Health; Drug Exports: Gains Forecast
The New York Times
December 23, 1986, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

 Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk
Length: 826 words
Byline: By Milt Freudenheim
Body




THE dynamic young biotechnology industry predicts substantial gains from the relaxed drug export measures that Congress approved on the last day of the recent session. ''It will put us on a level playing field with the big guys,'' says Brian C. Cunningham, vice president and counsel of Genentech Inc.
Drug exports already provide a rare spot of sunshine amid the dark shadows of the nation's record $170 billion trade deficit. With a trade surplus running at $700 million, total drug exports will be $3 billion this year, up from $2.7 billion in 1985, the Commerce Department says, and the numbers are likely to be even better under the new rules. The Senate Labor Committee, for instance, estimates that drug exports may grow by $400 million to $500 million a year under the loosened restrictions.
American manufacturers will now be allowed to export drugs that have not completed Food and Drug Administration testing. However, two restrictions apply: The drugs must be in the F.D.A.-approved stage of clinical testing on humans, and they may be exported only to 21 countries, and only when approved by those countries. The 21 countries, including Japan, Australia, New Zealand and a number of Western European nations, have their own reviewing standards.
Drug company lobbyists had been trying for 10 years to ease export restrictions. They have argued that it takes 7 to 10 years of research, along with $50 million to $70 million, to get Federal approval for a new drug. In the meantime, the lobbyists pointed out, some products could be produced and sold in countries with less rigorous requirements or a faster timetable for approval.
''Most of the time, a drug is approved in West Germany or the United Kingdom much more quickly than in the U.S.,'' Mr. Cunningham of Genentech said, ''although Japan usually takes even longer.'' John McLaughlin, a Washington representative for pharmaceutical companies, said he knew of ''about seven examples'' of drugs now qualified for export under the new law.
In addition, the Senate Labor Committee has cited estimates - disputed by other Congressional and academic experts - that the new rules, signed into law last month, will ''save'' as many as 12,000 American jobs a year, which would otherwise be transferred abroad.
Critics of the legislation, such as Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum, Democrat of Ohio, have argued that even Britain, despite a sophisticated review process, was forced to recall six drugs it had approved when the products were later linked to more than a dozen deaths and tens of thousands of adverse reactions.
There has been particular concern about ineffective protection for consumers in third world countries, such as Mexico and the Philippines. ''Anything goes in the third world,'' said a Congressional aide, who asked not to be identified.
The new law bars the transshipment of American-made drugs through the 21 ''approved'' countries to other parts of the world. Although the F.D.A. has said it does not have adequate staff to enforce the ban, Congressional aides believe the manufacturers will comply rather than risk losing the right to export to the rich markets in the 21 countries. More than two-thirds of the $77 billion world drug market is in North America, Western Europe and Japan, according to David J. Harnden, United States editor of Scrip, a London-based pharmaceutical publication.
Over all, the new law is expected to have the least effect on large multinational drug companies, which have products in overseas factories not subject to Federal supervision. The gains will be greater for the independent biotech drug companies, which are struggling in a promising field so new that only four products - human insulin; a human growth hormone; alpha interferon for one type of leukemia, and hepatitis-B vaccine - have received F.D.A. approval for human use.
Such companies do not have the resources to build plants overseas. Thus they have not been able to enjoy in foreign markets the high gross profits earned by other drug manufacturers. Gross profits can be high - ''79 to 80 percent of sales,'' Mr. Cunningham said. The relaxed export rules will increase the chances of these biotech companies to sell American-made products abroad, reducing their reliance on licensing deals, which pay royalties that are often just 10 percent of sales and which put their developments in the hands of potential competitors.
''We prefer to keep the manufacturing rights to ourselves and to supply our marketing partners with products,'' Mr. Cunningham said. Up to now, Genentech has made overseas licensing deals for its products, receiving money up front and the promise of royalties.
Independent biotechnology companies ''have a legitimate concern not to be giving away what is really a technological advantage at the moment, through licenses and other arrangements,'' said Philip Lee, director of the Institute for Health Policy Studies at the University of California at San Francisco.
 Graphic



 
drawing

 

End of Document


Judge Rules Against Generic Drug Maker
The Associated Press
January 22, 1981, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1981 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 635 words
Byline: By PAUL MOSES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEWARK, N.J.
Body




In a decision that a drug company says would deprive the public of low-cost drugs, a judge has upheld the government's right to require that generic drugs be tested extensively before being sold.
U.S. District Judge Frederick B. Lacey ruled Wednesday that there may be differences between generic drugs marketed by Premo Pharmaceutical Laboratories Inc. of South Hackensack, N.J., and more expensive brand-name products. In the case of one drug, the judge ruled, the difference could be serious enough to cause a fatal blood condition.
The judge barred Premo from selling untested generic drugs. Testing of drugs can take from five to 10 years.
Premo maintained it had marketed proven drugs after the brand-name manufacturers' patents expired. An attorney for Premo said the company would "almost certainly" appeal the ruling.
The marketing of generic drugs has been widely hailed by consumer groups because they often are cheaper than brand-name remedies.
New Jersey has a law requiring doctors who prescribe drugs to tell their patients whether generic versions of the drugs are available.
Eugene Zoppo, an official with the New Jersey Federation of Senior Citizens, called the judge's decision a setback to the group's efforts.
"When we passed a bill in the state Legislature for generic drugs, we felt the bill would save $7 million," he said. "This kind of decision is upsetting."
Premo's president, Seymour Blackman, says the FDA is depriving the public of low-cost drugs.
Lacey held that varying inactive ingredients and manufacturing processes caused critical differences in the rate generic and brand-name products are absorbed by users.
This could cause overdoses, the judge said in a 130-page opinion.
Executive Assistant U.S. Attorney Charles Walsh had contended that doctors often believed erroneously that imitations were equivalent to the more expensive drugs.
The judge said Premo had failed to test the rate drugs became effective on patients, and that one remedy, triamterene, could be fatal if an overdose were taken.
The drug, used to treat hypertension, could cause hyperkalemia, or a possibly fatal over-concentration of potassium in the blood, according to the judge.
Lacey issued a preliminary injunction banning Premo from shipping or manufacturing eight drugs in interstate commerce.
An additional hearing is planned on whether Premo must recall the eight drugs and destroy its stock.
The judge said the case's 5,400-page record of expert testimony was "perhaps the most detailed one developed to date in any case considering the generic-new drug issue."
Attorneys in the case said they regarded it as the most important decision in the dispute over testing generic drugs.
Blackman said his company will have to remove about 20 of its 52 drugs from the market as a result of the decision. The company had $18 million in revenue last year, he said.
Premo has filed suit in federal court for the District of Columbia charging the FDA with delaying approval of his company's drugs beyond a 180-day deadline.
The eight drugs involved in Wednesday's decision were: triamterene, which another manufacturer, Smith, Kline & French, uses as an ingredient of Dyazide, used in treating hypertension; trifluoperazine, which Smith, Kline & French uses as an ingredient of Stelazine, for treating psychotic disorders; Allopurinol tablets, sold as Zyloprim by Burroughs Wellcome for gout symptoms; chlorthalidone, sold as Hygroton by USV Pharmaceutical for hypertension; betamethasone valerate cream, marketed as Valisone by Schering Co. for skin disorders; doxylamine succinate, which Merrell-National Laboratories uses as an ingredient of Bendectin for morning sickness; and hydroxyzine pamoate, which Pfizer Pharmaceuticals sells as Vistaril, and hydroxizine hydrochloride, which Pfizer sells as Atarax, for anxiety.

 

End of Document


Judge Rules Against Generic Drug Maker
The Associated Press
January 22, 1981, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1981 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 633 words
Byline: By PAUL MOSES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEWARK, N.J.
Body




In a decision that a drug company says would deprive the public of low-cost drugs, a judge has upheld the government's right to require that generic drugs be tested extensively before being sold.
U.S. District Judge Frederick B. Lacey ruled Wednesday that there may be differences between generic drugs marketed by Premo Pharmaceutical Laboratories Inc. of South Hackensack and more expensive brand-name products. In the case of one drug, the judge ruled, the difference could be serious enough to cause a fatal blood condition.
The judge barred Premo from selling untested generic drugs. Testing of drugs can take from five to 10 years.
Premo maintained it had marketed proven drugs after the brand-name manufacturers' patents expired. An attorney for Premo said the company would "almost certainly" appeal the ruling.
The marketing of generic drugs has been widely hailed by consumer groups because they often are cheaper than brand-name remedies.
New Jersey has a law requiring doctors who prescribe drugs to tell their patients whether generic versions of the drugs are available.
Eugene Zoppo, an official with the New Jersey Federation of Senior Citizens, called the judge's decision a setback to the group's efforts.
"When we passed a bill in the state Legislature for generic drugs, we felt the bill would save $7 million," he said. "This kind of decision is upsetting."
Premo's president, Seymour Blackman, says the FDA is depriving the public of low-cost drugs.
Lacey held that varying inactive ingredients and manufacturing processes caused critical differences in the rate generic and brand-name products are absorbed by users.
This could cause overdoses, the judge said in a 130-page opinion.
Executive Assistant U.S. Attorney Charles Walsh had contended that doctors often believed erroneously that imitations were equivalent to the more expensive drugs.
The judge said Premo had failed to test the rate drugs became effective on patients, and that one remedy, triamterene, could be fatal if an overdose were taken.
The drug, used to treat hypertension, could cause hyperkalemia, or a possibly fatal over-concentration of potassium in the blood, according to the judge.
Lacey issued a preliminary injunction banning Premo from shipping or manufacturing eight drugs in interstate commerce.
An additional hearing is planned on whether Premo must recall the eight drugs and destroy its stock.
The judge said the case's 5,400-page record of expert testimony was "perhaps the most detailed one developed to date in any case considering the generic-new drug issue."
Attorneys in the case said they regarded it as the most important decision in the dispute over testing generic drugs.
Blackman said his company will have to remove about 20 of its 52 drugs from the market as a result of the decision. The company had $18 million in revenue last year, he said.
Premo has filed suit in federal court for the District of Columbia charging the FDA with delaying approval of his company's drugs beyond a 180-day deadline.
The eight drugs involved in Wednesday's decision were: triamterene, which another manufacturer, Smith, Kline & French, uses as an ingredient of Dyazide, used in treating hypertension; trifluoperazine, which Smith, Kline & French uses as an ingredient of Stelazine, for treating psychotic disorders; Allopurinol tablets, sold as Zyloprim by Burroughs Wellcome for gout symptoms; chlorthalidone, sold as Hygroton by USV Pharmaceutical for hypertension; betamethasone valerate cream, marketed as Valisone by Schering Co. for skin disorders; doxylamine succinate, which Merrell-National Laboratories uses as an ingredient of Bendectin for morning sickness; and hydroxyzine pamoate, which Pfizer Pharmaceuticals sells as Vistaril, and hydroxizine hydrochloride, which Pfizer sells as Atarax, for anxiety.

 

End of Document


ZOMAX Returning To Drugstores In Matter Of Weeks
The Associated Press
March 11, 1983, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1983 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 713 words
Dateline: NEW BRUNSWICK, N.J.
Body




ZOMAX, the prescription pain reliever temporarily pulled off the market for new labeling by its maker after reports of allergic reactions, including five deaths, will return to pharmacy shelves "in a matter of weeks," Johnson & Johnson announced Friday.
"There have been people saying we're not coming back. It's going to be a fairly short time. The point is we're going to bring it back and fairly soon," James A. Murray, a spokesman for the company here said. He could not predict when the drug will first reappear.
Murray said the non-nrcotic painkiller voluntarily recalled eight days ago would be available in drugstores as soon as the company repackages the drug with new inserts detailing which patients should not be given the drug. McNeil Pharmaceutical, a division of Johnson & Johnson, manufacturers the drug.
The wording of the inserts must first be approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Murray said.
The deaths of five people in the past year in Massachusetts, Kansas, North Dakota and New York were attributed to severe allergic reactions to ZOMAX, Murray said. About 1,000 cases of allergic reactions ranging from mild to severe have been reported.
Two of the people who died were sensitive to aspirin, and a package insert warned such people against using the product, the company said.
On March 4, Johnson & Johnson announced it was withdrawing ZOMAX until a new labeling spelling out possible side effects could be issued in consultation with the FDA. The FDA did not request the recall and said the drug would not have to be taken off the market permanently.
"McNeil Pharmaceutical has been discussing with the Food and Drug Administration revised prescribing information for the prescription analgesic ZOMAX, which was temporarily withdrawn from the market pending evaluation of reported serious allergic reactions and reconsideration of labeling," Murray said.
"The review process is well underway and as a result, McNeil expects to again make ZOMAX available with revised labeling in a matter of weeks," he said.
"Final wording of the labeling is not yet available but will be sent to physicians before the product is remarketed. The anticipated changes in the prescribing information will emphasize warnings regarding allergic reactions and will redefine the patient population for which the product is indicated for use," said Murray.
"The discussions had begun before we made the withdrawal," he said.
ZOMAX had been prescribed to 15 million people since it appeared on the market in October 1980, the company said. Sales of ZOMAX in the United States and about 25 nations overseas _ including countries in Europe, South America and Asia _ were $82 million last year.
Johnson & Johnson estimated that the withdrawal of the popular drug would cost the company $40 million before taxes, resulting in the reduction of after-tax earnings by $20 million, Murray said.
The company asked consumers to stop taking the drug and to return it to drugstores for a refund.
Meanwhile, nearly 2,700 people by Thursday called a toll-free, 24-hour hotline set up eight days ago by McNeil Pharmaceutical to answer questions and complaints, he said. More than 1,000 of the calls were from pharmacists.
The recall of ZOMAX was the second financial blow in six months to Johnsile "to the brink of a totalitarian abyss" by permitting Allende's election in 1970.
On the economic front, pinochet said the government, without abandoning its free-market principles, was launching a program to create jobs, boost production, raise exports, meet obligations on its foreign debt and halt a decline of treasury reserves.
He offered no details of the program, other than to promise three wage increases this year for public employees whose income has been frozen for 19 months.
Blaming the recession largely on international factors such as declining export prices for copper, the president said it had been aggravated by steep interest rates caused by a high degree of self-lending by a few bank-based conglomerates that "acted in the shadow of faith this regime gave to private enterpise."
For that reason, he said, the government took over 80 percent of the banking system in January and would now review all economic legislation to seek ways of curbing abuses of the free-market system.

 

End of Document


U.S. Charges Safety, Effectiveness of Drug Misrepresented
The Associated Press
July 9, 1987, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1987 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 568 words
Byline: By PHYLLIS MESSINGER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A federal grand jury in St. Louis, Mo., on Thursday charged a drug manufacturer, a distributor and three individuals with misrepresenting the safety and effectiveness of a drug used in treating premature infants.
The indictment alleged that the drug company received reports that "several infants" treated with the drug died from symptoms associated with the product's use. Amy Brown, a Justice Department spokeswoman, said she could not confirm that infants had died.
Assistant Attorney General Richard K. Willard, head of the Justice Department's civil division, said the indictment alleged that the manufacturer and distributor of E-Ferol Aqueous Solution knew the drug was potentially dangerous to the health of infants and had not been approved by the Food and Drug Administration for its intended use.
The indictment charged that Carter-Glogau Laboratories, Inc., the drug's manufacturer, formerly of Phoenix, Ariz., and O'Neal, Jones and Feldman Inc., the drug's distributor, formerly of St. Louis, "developed, manufactured and marketed E-Ferol without any scientific testing to determine whether it was safe and effective for use in premature infants."
Despite the lack of testing, the indictment said, Carter-Glogau and O'Neal, Jones indicated to physicians specializing in the care of premature infants and to other medical professionals that E-Ferol could be used to treat retrolental fibroplasia, a disease that can cause blindness in premature infants.
The indictment alleged that in October 1983, O'Neal, Jones sales representatives were told to say, if asked, that E-Ferol was approved by the Food and Drug Administration for intravenous use.
Between November 1983 and April 1984, Carter-Glogau manufactured and shipped to O'Neal, Jones about 40,000 vials of E-Ferol, about 26,000 of which were distributed to doctors and hospitals nationwide, the indictment charged.
Until April 1984, the drug manufacturer and distributor "continued to represent to medical professionals that E-Ferol was safe and did not disclose to anyone using or considering using the product the severe adverse reactions and deaths which had been reported to them," the indictment said.
Those adverse reactions included excessive weight gain, abdominal enlargement and liver problems.
The indictment further alleged that all the defendants knew by Dec. 19, 1983, that "there were questions by scientific researchers concerning whether Vitamin E acetate (the type of Vitamin E used in E-Ferol), when administered intravenously, did in fact reduce the severity and incidence of retrolental fibroplasia."
Carter-Glogau voluntarily recalled the drug in April 1984, Ms. Brown said.
Named in the indictment besides Carter-Glogau, which is now known as Retrac, Inc., and O'Neal, Jones, which is now known as O'Neal, Inc., were Ronald M. Carter Sr., former president of Carter-Glogau; Larry K. Hiland, former president and chief executive officer of O'Neal, Jones; and James B. Madison, former executive vice president of O'Neal, Jones, and the official responsible for product development and regulatory compliance.
They are charged with conspiracy to commit mail and wire fraud through letters mailed to hospitals and through phone conversations with medical professionals. They also are charged with violating the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act for marketing a new drug without FDA approval.
Efforts to reach the defendants were unsuccessful.

 

End of Document


FDA Commissioner 'Shocked' at Bribes Tied to Drug Companies
The Associated Press
July 12, 1989, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 561 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration says he doesn't know whether the government can withdraw market approval for products from generic drug companies that bribed FDA scientists.
Commissioner Frank E. Young vowed to seek penalties against the firms, but told a congressional panel Tuesday "we're having a difficult time trying to determine what we can do to remove these particular products" from the market.
Young told the House Energy and Commerce subcommittee on oversight and investigations he is "shocked, embarrassed and angered" by revelations that FDA scientists accepted bribes from the firms.
Subcommittee Chairman John D. Dingell, D-Mich., said the scandal means "We can no longer be reasonably confident that the FDA is able to detect the entry of unsafe or inefficacious generic drugs in the nation's pharmacies."
Young countered that a special review of the products made by companies implicated so far "have uncovered no safety concerns," but he conceded "we cannot be fully confident on the issue of product safety" until more tests are done.
He also outlined new administrative procedures, including a shakeup of the generic drug division and prohibitions against idle contacts between FDA officials and manufacturers, to head off repetition of the case.
The subcommittee has been conducting its own investigation while the U.S. Attorney's Office in Baltimore continues to pursue a criminal probe in which two FDA scientists, Charles Y. Chang and David J. Brancato, have pleaded guilty to accepting bribes from drug companies and a third has been charged with doing so.
According to criminal informations filed in the case, American Therapeutics, Inc., Par Pharmaceuticals and Pharmaceutical Basics, Inc., are among companies which sought favored treatment from the FDA in their bids to market generic drugs.
Another firm, Vitarine Pharmaceuticals, Inc., of Springfield Gardens, N.Y., is under investigation for allegedly substituting samples of an original product, Dyazide, a high-blood-pressure drug, in its bid to win approval of its generic copycat. Dyazide is made by the SmithKline Beckman Corp., and is one of the most widely prescribed drugs in the country.
"We are actively investigating all aspects of this case, which we regard - should the facts be confirmed - as wholly unconscionable and intolerable. In addition, we are making every effort to determine whether any other firms may have engaged in this practice," Young said.
Top executives of Vitarine have denied knowledge of the alleged substitution, and have suspended at least three employees involved with the submission. It has voluntarily recalled the drug, as well as several others, pending the results of the FDA review.
Dingell complained "the FDA has yet to move against the companies corrupting the FDA's process. Both Par Pharmaceuticals and American Therapeutics, Inc., the two biggest providers of illegal gratuities to FDA employees named in criminal informations to date, have each received … new generic drug approvals."
Carl Peck, director of the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation, confirmed he recently approved generic products submitted by both firms, but said they involved drugs in which "none of the implicated reviewers had a part," and for which applications had been pending for 1 1/2 years.
Dingell said that response shows "frivolity prevails at the FDA."
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto WX9

 

End of Document


Exec says Tylenol selling again
United Press International
March 30, 1983, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1983 U.P.I.
Section: Domestic News
Length: 299 words
Dateline: WELLESLEY, Mass.
Body




Johnson & Johnson has regained 75 percent of its former pain reliever market by winning back the public's trust in Tylenol, the corporation's top executive said Wednesday.
''We're still convinced that given the time, and the willingness to spend the money (on advertising), we'll get it all back,'' said James E. Burke, chairman and chief executive officer for the company whose subsidiary, McNeil Pharmaceuticals, manufactures Tylenol.
Addressing more than 800 students, faculty, and business people at Babson College, Burke told how the corporation handled the public relations crisis last fall when seven people died after taking extra strength Tylenol capsules spiked with cyanide.
One of its first moves was to ''get in touch with the public as quickly as possible and as intimately as possible'' Burke said. The New Jersey-based company also acted quickly in recalling Tylenol while police investigated the case of the poisonings.
Burke said as a result of the Tylenol deaths, the product's share of the adult over the counter analgesic market had dropped 87 percent, but the corporation's reaction to the crisis helped to revive the public's confidence in the drug when it was back on the shelf in December, he said.
Burke said the corporation's image was tarnished again recently by the death of five people who developed allergic reactions to Zomax, a prescription pain reliever also manufactured by McNeil Pharmaceuticals.
The company has temporarily withdrawn Zomax from the market until new labels are made warning consumers of possible side effects.
According to the FDA one in 15,000 people are allergic to the drug.
The Zomax recall is ''a very different situation'' from the Tylenol poisonings, said Burke. ''People know we weren't responsible for the Tylenol crisis. Zomax is our problem.''

 

End of Document


Radioactive Polonium Leakage Found At Three More Plants
The Associated Press
February 11, 1988, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1988 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 671 words
Byline: By LEE BYRD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Federal officials said Wednesday they have found three more plants where a widely used industrial device leaked tiny particles of radioactive polonium, but "so far we've seen nothing that would pose a threat to public health."
There is no evidence of product contamination at any of the plants, now totaling 28, where leaks have been detected, according to spokesmen for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the Food and Drug Administration.
The problem involves an ionizing air gun, manufactured by the 3M Corp., used to control static electricity and remove dust from the air. About 2,000 of the devices were recalled from food, drug and cosmetic plants over the weekend, after NRC inspectors confirmed several instances in which the guns leaked tiny ceramic spheres containing polonium 210.
In all 28 cases reported so far, officials said, it appeared the particles fell harmlessly to the floor and did not contaminate any items, ranging from beer to baby formula, on the production lines. Nor was there any serious threat to plant workers, they said.
The FDA and various state agencies, however, initiated a crash product inspection program, and several plants were closed temporarily for the review. Most have re-opened.
The latest plants where leaks were found include two photo labs, Cress in Pawtucket, R. I., and Photofinish in McCall, S.C., and a Block Drugs plant in Humacao, Puerto Rico, which makes shampoo, according to Robert Newlin of the NRC.
Polonium 210, a naturally occuring decay product of radium, emits alpha particles incapable of penetrating the skin. Though it could prove a health threat if ingested in sufficient amounts, the material used in the air gun is surrounded by a protective ceremic shell that, if intact, would pass safely through the body, officials said. Still, they expressed some concern over the possibility that some of the shells could be crushed or cracked, allowing more radiation to escape.
FDA Commissioner Frank Young said one of the particles, if ingested into a lung and absorbed there, would yield about 4 rem of radiation. As a comparison, the average cigarette smoker naturally absorbs about 6 rem of polonium radiation a year, he said.
Following disclosure of the leaks, the Arizona Health Department sought a recall of some Coca-Cola products and some baby formulas made at plants which used the suspect ionizing gun.
On Monday, Arizona officials had urged consumers not to drink Coca-Cola or other soft drinks in 12-ounce cans produced by the Coca-Cola bottler in Phoenix or use 13-ounce concentrate cans of Isomil and Similac baby formula produced by the Casa Grande plant, a subsidiary of Abbott Laboratory Inc. in Chicago.
But on Wednesday, state officials lifted their embargos on the canned Coca-Cola products and the two brands of baby formulas. The Department of Health Services and the Radiation Regulatory Agency said hundreds of samples were tested from each of the products concerned and that they have been found to be free from any radiactive contamination.
Dave Duarte, an FDA spokesman, said Wednesday that "We have not found any products to be contaminated. So far we've seen nothing that would pose a threat to the public health. We do not feel that any recall is warranted."
Although nonradioactive devices are available, air guns using polonium 210 have become increasingly popular since being licensed by the NRC in 1964. About 20,000 of the 3M models are in use, and only those at plants producing food, drugs or cosmetics have been recalled.
NRC and 3M officials were scheduled to meet in Glen Ellyn, Ill., on Thursday over issues surrounding the failure of the devices. NRC officials said earlier they were investigating evidence that company records showed as many as one percent of the guns failed an annual test, while 3M reported a failure rate of 0.03 percent, apparently after discounting for models damaged in use.
Hugh Thompson, head of the agency's nuclear safety office, said that "In my view, on these type of devices you should have no failures."

 

End of Document


Company Recalls Selenium Tablets
The Associated Press
March 10, 1984, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1984 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 260 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




An Arizona drug distributor has voluntarily recalled 250 bottles of selenium tablets that contain potentially harmful or fatal doses of the mineral, the Food and Drug Administration said Saturday.
Brite Years Inc. of Tempe, Ariz., agreed to recall the bottles of Brite Years Selenium tablets with lots numbers 012163, 016213, 301216 and 012161 printed on a white label on the bottom of the bottle, said FDA spokesman William Grigg.
The FDA issued a special alert about the product because the recalled tablets contain levels of selenium that could cause liver injuries, Grigg said. Four recalled tablets taken at one time could be fatal, Grigg said. Despite instructions to take only one tablet per day, some users may take more on the assumption the pills are harmless, he said.
Selenium is "sometimes used in the hopes that it will retard aging" or relieve menstrual cramps, "but it doesn't have any authenticated uses," Grigg said.
"Apparently there have been some books suggesting it can retard aging, but there is no proof of that," Grigg said.
The recalled tablets were distributed in Alaska, Alabama, Arkansas, Arizona, California, Iowa, Missouri, Montana, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Texas, Utah and Virginia.
Grigg said there have been no reports of injuries caused by the recalled tablets. Brite Years recommended that users return the recalled bottles to stores where they were purchased and consult their doctors, Grigg said.
The tablets were manufactured for Brite Years by Superior Health Vitimin and Health Foods of Deer Park, N.Y., Grigg said.

 

End of Document


Drug Manufacturer Says it Falsified Tests to Seek FDA Approval
The Associated Press
June 30, 1989, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 604 words
Byline: By DEBORAH MESCE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The generic version of a popular high blood pressure drug was sold to the public without undergoing full safety tests, a House subcommittee charges.
Vitarine Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Springfield Gardens, N.Y., recalled the drug, a generic version of Dyazide, earlier this month because of concerns that faulty data may have been submitted to the Food and Drug Administration in an application for approval of the drug.
A House subcommittee, in a letter to Vitarine on Thursday, said it had learned that the company has told FDA officials that the tests were "false because the innovator product (the original drug) was put in Vitarine capsules and simply tested against itself."
"The new information raises serious concerns" about the safety of Vitarine's product as well as a generic version made by Bolar Pharmaceutical and the original drug made by SmithKline Beckman, said Rep. John Dingell, D-Mich., in a letter to the FDA. He chairs the investigations subcommittee of the House Energy and Commerce Committee.
A subcommittee source said the tests yielded different results even though SmithKline's original product allegedly was being compared with itself, instead of with the Vitarine generic drug.
"The drug (the Vitarine generic) is not what was tested, so you don't have any idea whether it is safe," said the source, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
Before its patents expired, Dyazide was one of the best-selling drugs in the country, measured by dollar volume of sales.
The subcommittee asked Pharmakinetics of Baltimore, Md., the laboratory that conducted the tests comparing Vitarine's product and Bolar's version with the SmithKline original, to hold all samples of the drugs.
The comparison studies are crucial to the FDA's approval of a generic, lower-cost version of a prescription drug. The tests determine whether the generic drug is chemically identical to and thus biologically equivalent to the original.
Dingell's subcommittee has been conducting an investigation into alleged bribery in the FDA's generic drug division. The Justice Department also is investigating the allegations.
The FDA declined to comment on the subcommittee's latest charges.
"The FDA is in the middle of an ongoing investigation of Vitarine and it would be improper to comment any further at this time," said spokesman Jeff Nesbit. Asked whether the FDA had safety concerns about Dyazide or either of its generic versions, he said, "no," but added, "I really can't speak to that."
Alan Kaplan, a Washington attorney representing Vitarine, said: "This is a matter that is being investigated and Vitarine has advised the FDA of this possibility. It's still under investigation. There's no definite conclusion at this time."
He said the investigation "involves certain products in which certain people have been working," and at least three Vitarine employees have been suspended.
Officials from Bolar, SmithKline and Pharmakinetics could not be reached for comment.
In a letter to FDA Commissioner Frank Young, Dingell asked the FDA to test samples of other prescription drug products at Pharmakinetics "to determine if other generic drug firms have employed the same device to fraudulently achieve approvable bioequivalency status."
Dingell said the subcommittee knows of "at least four other cases" in which Vitarine submitted the original drug to a contract lab for a bioequivalence study. None of the four cases involves drugs currently marketed, he said.
On June 1, the FDA announced that Vitarine was voluntarily recalling 12 products and suspending sales of 13 others because of concerns about faulty data in documents submitted to the FDA.

 

End of Document


FDA Says Generic Drug Review Results in One Recall
The Associated Press
October 3, 1989, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 196 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Food and Drug Administration said Tuesday its continuing review of the 30 top-selling generic drugs has resulted so far in the recall of one drug.
Pharmaceutical Basics Inc. of Denver recalled its antifungal nystatin tablets because they were found to be below potency, the FDA said.
Five other companies have recalled drugs since the FDA began investigating allegations of fraud and corruption within its generic drug division and among some generic drug makers. None of the recalled has posed a major safety problem, the FDA said.
The FDA said the Sept. 27 recall by Pharmaceutical Basics was "the first recall" stemming from the testing. It did not say whether further recalls would be required.
The FDA said it has analyzed 1,827 samples of the 30 leading generics for potency, dissolution, composition and other specifications, and nearly all were found to be within acceptable specifications. About 1.6 percent of the samples were found to be deficient in potency or dissolution, which the FDA said is about the rate it usually finds under normal industry conditions.
The agency said it has more testing to do, and its findings are to be released at the end of the month.

 

End of Document


FDA Says Generic Drug Review Results in One Recall
The Associated Press
October 4, 1989, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 195 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Food and Drug Administration says its ongoing review of the 30 top-selling generic drugs has resulted so far in the recall of one drug.
Pharmaceutical Basics Inc. of Denver recalled its antifungal nystatin tablets because they were found to be below potency, the FDA said Tuesday.
Five other companies have recalled drugs since the FDA began investigating allegations of fraud and corruption within its generic drug division and among some generic drug makers. None of the recalled has posed a major safety problem, the FDA said.
The FDA said the Sept. 27 recall by Pharmaceutical Basics was "the first recall" stemming from the testing. It did not say whether further recalls would be required.
The FDA said it has analyzed 1,827 samples of the 30 leading generics for potency, dissolution, composition and other specifications, and nearly all were found to be within acceptable specifications. About 1.6 percent of the samples were found to be deficient in potency or dissolution, which the FDA said is about the rate it usually finds under normal industry conditions.
The agency said it has more testing to do, and its findings are to be released at the end of the month.

 

End of Document


NEW YORK COMPANY EXAMINED BY F.D.A.
The New York Times
July 1, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 7, Column 6; National Desk
Length: 575 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: WASHINGTON, June 30
Body




The Food and Drug Administration said today that it was investigating a New York City drug manufacturer that a House subcommittee says falsified tests to win approval for its generic version of a drug used to treat high blood pressure.
That accusation was made Thursday by the House Energy and Commerce Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations. It said the drug, a generic version of Dyazide made by Vitarine Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Queens, had been sold to the public for more than a year without undergoing full safety tests.
Vitarine recalled the drug earlier this month because of concerns that company employees might have submitted faulty data to the F.D.A. in an application for approval.
The subcommittee said in a letter to Vitarine that it had learned that the company itself had alerted F.D.A. officials that instead of using the Vitarine generic drug for comparison tests with the originally formulated Dyazide, employees had substituted Dyazide.
 
'No Definite Conclusion'
As a result, the subcommittee said, one sample of Dyazide was tested against another and the Vitarine sample was never measured against the original to see if it was absorbed into the body at the same rate and to the same extent as Dyazide.
Asked about the subcommittee's allegation, Alan Kaplan, a Washington lawyer representing Vitarine, said: ''This is a matter that is being investigated, and Vitarine has advised the F.D.A. of this possibility. It's still under investigation. There's no definite conclusion at this time.''
Mr. Kaplan said at least three Vitarine employees had been suspended.
The chairman of the subcommittee, Representative John D. Dingell, Democrat of Michigan, said in a letter to the F.D.A. that his panel's finding ''raises serious concerns'' about the safety of Vitarine's product.
But a drug agency official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said the agency doubted that Vitarine's product was unsafe, noting that it had undergone a chemical review and that the agency had not received any reports of problems with anyone who had used the drug.
 
Widely Prescribed Drug
An agency spokesman, Jeff Nesbit, said, ''The F.D.A. is in the middle of an ongoing investigation of Vitarine, and it would be improper to comment any further at this time.'' Asked whether the F.D.A. had safety concerns about Dyazide or either of its generic versions, he said, ''No,'' but added, ''I really can't speak to that.''
Dyazide, made by the SmithKline Beckman Corporation, is one of the most widely prescribed drugs in the country. Before its first generic competition appeared in 1987, sales were more than $300 million annually. But after the first generic competition, made by the Bolar Pharmaceutical Company, came on the market, SmithKline's Dyazide sales dropped to $200 million in 1988, said a SmithKline spokesman, Jeremy Heymsfeld.
Vitarine's generic version won F.D.A. approval in February 1988.
The subcommittee has asked Pharmakinetics of Baltimore, the laboratory that conducted the tests comparing Vitarine's and Bolar's products with the SmithKline original, to hold all samples of the drugs.
Mark Perkal, executive vice president of Pharmakinetics, said there was no way the laboratory would have known whether a company submitted false test samples. ''We're not in the business to detect fraud,'' he said.
The comparison studies are one of two major tests used to win the F.D.A.'s approval of a generic, lower-cost version of a prescription drug.

 

End of Document


FDA Commissioner 'Shocked' at Bribes Tied to Drug Companies
The Associated Press
July 11, 1989, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 641 words
Byline: By LEE BYRD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration told Congress on Tuesday he is "shocked, embarrassed and angered" by revelations that FDA scientists accepted bribes from generic drug companies.
Commissioner Frank E. Young vowed to seek maximum penalties against the firms. But he said "we're having a difficult time trying to determine what we can do to remove these particular products" from the market.
Young and his top aides were called before the House Energy and Commerce subcommittee on oversight and investigations, whose chairman, John D. Dingell, D-Mich.- said the scandal means "We can no longer be reasonably confident that the FDA is able to detect the entry of unsafe or inefficacious generic drugs in the nation's pharmacies."
Young countered that a specaal review of the products made by companies implicated so far "have uncovered no safety concerns," but he conceded "we cannot be fully confident on the issue of product safety" until further tests are conducted.
He also outlined new administrative procedures, including a shakeup of the generic drug division and prohibitions against idle contacts between FDA officials and manufacturers, in a bid to head off any repetition of the case.
The subcommittee, for months, has been conducting its own investigation while the U.S. Attorney's Office in Baltimore continues to pursue a criminal probe in which two FDA scientists, Charles Y. Chang and David J. Brancato, already have pleaded guilty to accepting bribes from drug companies and a third has been charged with doing so.
According to criminal informations filed in the case, American Therapeutics, Inc., Par Pharmaceuticals and Pharmaceutical Basics, Inc., are among companies which sought favored treatment from the FDA in their bids to market generic drugs.
Another firm, Vitarine Pharmaceuticals, Inc., of Springfield Gardens, N.Y., is under investigation for allegedly substituting samples of an original product, Dyazide, a high-blood-pressure drug, in its bid to win approval of its generic copycat. Dyazide is made by the SmithKline Beckman Corp., and is one of the most widely prescribed drugs in the country.
"We are aware that the firm substituted the pioneer drug for its own and used the fraudulent product in its bioequivalent studies," Young said. "We are actively investigation all aspects of this case, which we regard - should the facts be confirmed - as wholly unconscionable and intolerable. In addition, we are making every effort to determine whether any other firms may have engaged in this practice."
Top executives of Vitarine have denied knowledge of the alleged substitution, and have suspended at least three employees involved with the submission. It has voluntarily recalled the drug, as well as several others, pending the results of the FDA review.
Dingell complained that "the FDA has yet to move against the companies corrupting the FDA's process. Both Par Pharmaceuticals and American Therapeutics, Inc., the two biggest providers of illegal gratuities to FDA employees named in criminal informations to date, have each received … new generic drug approvals."
Carl Peck, director of the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation, confirmed that he recently approved generic products submitted by both firms, but said they involved drugs in which "none of the implicated reviewers had a part," and for which applications had been pending for 1 1/2 years.
Dingell rejected that response, declaring "frivolity prevails at the FDA."
Young said that "I will take the maximum legal recourse" against companies involved in the bribery scheme, but he is uncertain whether he has the authority to ordered products removed which otherwise have met testing standards. He agreed with Rep. Ron Wyden, D-Ore., that Congress should consider giving him new authority to suspend products for reasons other than safety concerns.

 

End of Document


RhoGAM batch didn't cause AIDS case, study finds
The San Diego Union-Tribune
November 6, 1987 Friday

 Copyright 1987 The San Diego Union-Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. A-1
Length: 910 words
Byline: Rex Dalton, Staff Writer
Body




A federal investigation has concluded that a questioned batch of RhoGAM did not give AIDS to a military woman from Louisiana, who was treated with the blood-derived drug during pregnancy. In checking the woman's history, federal investigators found that the U.S. Army sergeant had not disclosed having sexual relations about four years ago with a man who authorities have determined was infected with the AIDS virus, according to two federal sources. Since sexual relations are a known mode of transmission of the deadly disease, the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) in Atlanta and the federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA) have closed their joint probes of RhoGAM as a source of the virus, federal officials said. The results of the probe mean that none of the more than 100 pregnant women locally who received doses last year from the questioned lot at Scripps Memorial, Mercy and Grossmont hospitals should be concerned, doctors added. "Our position is that RhoGAM is safe; and that (manufactured) lot of RhoGAM is safe," said Dr. Gerald V. Quinnan, assistant director of the FDA's center in Maryland that monitors blood-derived drugs. Quinnan's center also reviewed the manufacturing process and tested a sample from the questioned lot of RhoGAM: RHG 636. This review indicated there was no problem with the manufacturing process. In September, U.S. military officials in Washington, D.C., issued a worldwide recall of RhoGAM from lot RHG 636 because they suspected it was the source of the AIDS virus that infected the Army woman and her newborn child.
The FDA, however, didn't issue a recall of the lot of 12,500 doses, which were distributed and used up in July and August last year. F. Robert Kniffin, a spokesman for Ortho Diagnostic Systems Inc., the Johnson & Johnson firm that makes RhoGAM in New Jersey, said: "We felt all along that RhoGAM was not involved in the transmission of AIDS. This report confirms our confidence in the safety of the product." RhoGAM is among a class of drugs known as Rh immune globulins, which are components of the immune system.
They are given to about 15 percent of all women late in pregnancy and shortly after birth to prevent newborns from developing a blood disease caused by incompatibility between mother and infant blood. Rh immune globulins are manufactured from pooled plasma collected from many donors.
The process involves the use of alcohol, which authorities say should kill any virus, like that which causes AIDS. There never has been a case of AIDS caused by an immune globulin, but medical detectives have studied this extensively because of concern that the blood-derived product might transmit the virus. About 25 years ago, authorities said there was a case in which viral hepatitis was spread through use of a similar substance, albumin, which is from pooled blood supplies.
That case was blamed on a breakdown in quality control, one which authorities don't believe could happen in this age. In the case of the Army woman, she received a dose of RhoGAM from the questioned lot in September of last year while she was stationed at Fort Polk, La. She and her child, who was born in December, tested positive for exposure to the AIDS virus in Louisiana earlier this year, and then were sent in September to Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington for treatment. Physicians at Walter Reed issued the report that implicated RhoGAM because they could not determine any other mode of transmission of the AIDS virus, which is spread by semen, blood and blood-derived products, other body fluids and the sharing of intravenous needles. At the time, authorities described the woman's history as follows: She had been married eight years, had not had sexual relations outside her marriage, didn't use intravenous drugs and hadn't received any blood transfusions. As the FDA examined the manufacturing process of lot RHG 636, sources said, the CDC conducted an epidemiological investigation of the woman's health history, turning up the previously unknown sexual encounter about four years ago. While stationed at Fort Hood in Texas, the woman also had two tattoos applied in the nearby town of Killeen, Texas.
Tattoo needles are a known possible mode of transmission of the AIDS virus. After treatment at Walter Reed, the Army woman returned to Louisiana to convalesce, officials said.
Doctors had graded her as being in stage V of AIDS; stage VI is the worst, sources said. But the woman's child does not have AIDS, despite the earlier positive test for exposure to the virus, doctors said recently. The earlier test was for the presence of antibodies to the AIDS virus. Antibodies are components of the immune system that are generated and attack intruders into the body. The positive test result apparently was a reaction to the mother's antibodies, which were still in the child, doctors said.
As the child grew older, he shed his mother's antibodies.
Tests of his own antibodies then showed he actually was not infected, officials said. About half the children of women infected with the AIDS virus develop the disease after they are born, medical authorities say. The military's action of recalling the drug stirred considerable concern among physicians and pregnant women nationally, forcing Ortho to set up a nationwide toll-free telephone number that handled more than 5,000 inquiries. Some physicians questioned whether military officials overreacted and set off an necessary nationwide scare.
 Load-Date: August 10, 2007

 

End of Document


`Battered woman' acquitted by jury of federal heroin smuggling charges
The San Diego Union-Tribune
September 25, 1987 Friday

 Copyright 1987 The San Diego Union-Tribune
Section: LOCAL; Pg. B-3:5,6; B-12:3,4
Length: 567 words
Byline: Lorie Hearn, Staff Writer
Body




A San Jose woman was acquitted of federal drug charges yesterday after arguing to a jury that her boyfriend beat her until she agreed to smuggle $283,500 in heroin across the Mexican border. The case is believed to be the first successful use of the "battered woman" defense in a federal drug smuggling case. The U.S. District Court jury -- composed of seven women and five men -- deliberated the fate of Maria de Jesus Ferandez-Fernandez most of yesterday before finding her not guilty of attempting to import heroin and possession of drugs with intent to distribute. Defense attorney Juanita Brooks said Fernandez wept even before the jury announced its verdict, just as she wept on the witness stand when describing how her boyfriend beat her repeatedly during their three-year relationship. Fernandez was arrested in June 1986 when she tried to cross into the United States from Mexicali with about 1 1/2 pounds of heroin strapped to her stomach.
The street value of the heroin was put at $283,500. She faced up to 20 years in prison on each count, and Brooks said Fernandez spent four months in custody until her father hired an attorney and put his house up for her bond a year ago. In arguing her case, Brooks told the jurors not to acquit Fernandez out of pity but rather because she had been forced to commit the offenses out of fear of her live-in boyfriend, Gonzalo Gonzalez. Brooks called Gonzalez "an animal" who beat and kicked her client so badly she had to be hospitalized.
She showed the jury pictures of Fernandez, taken a week after she had been arrested, with fresh, swollen wounds that Brooks contended proved she was beaten in Guadalajara when she first refused to be Gonzalez's "pack horse" for drugs. In order to argue a "duress" defense, Brooks convinced Chief U.S. District Court Judge Gordon Thompson Jr. that the threat of harm to Fernandez was real and immediate and that she had no reasonable means of escape. "Basically, she had a psychological gun to her head," Brooks said later. The drugs had been strapped onto Fernandez so tightly that it took two people to cut away the electrical tape securing them, Brooks told the jury. On her journey to the border, Brooks argued, Fernandez believed she was being followed and watched by her boyfriend, who had threatened her and her two children if she failed to deliver the heroin to a contact at a bar in Northern California. Assistant U.S. Attorney Patrick O'Toole yesterday described the case as a "close call" because the prosecution had the burden of disproving the "duress" defense beyond a reasonable doubt. In the trial, O'Toole maintained that Fernandez was caught red-handed with the heroin, which he said she was willing to transport for $3,000 to support her own drug addiction. "I am not saying she had not been beaten in the past," O'Toole told the jury, but he disagreed that Fernandez had been beaten into agreeing to smuggle the heroin.
"She probably was abused but she wanted and needed drugs and wanted and needed money for her drug habit." After the verdict, O'Toole acknowledged that it was a difficult case, and both he and Brooks said they could recall no other federal drug case in which the "battered woman syndrome" won an acquittal. "Everyone involved with the prosecution felt sorry for the defendant," O'Toole said, adding: "The jury carefully thought through the case....I am not critical of the result."
 Load-Date: August 10, 2007

 

End of Document


NCAA rules Nunn ineligible; Aztec cornerback tests positive for methamphetamine
The San Diego Union-Tribune
December 31, 1986 Wednesday

 Copyright 1986 The San Diego Union-Tribune
Section: SPORTS; Pg. D-1
Length: 559 words
Byline: Brian Brown, Staff Writer
Body




San Diego State cornerback Clarence Nunn, expected to start in last night's Sea World Holiday Bowl, was declared ineligible for the game yesterday, because he tested positive on a recent drug test conducted by the NCAA. The SDSU athletic department has disputed the finding, claiming that a nasal inhaler used by Nunn to control flu symptoms was the cause of the positive test.
An NCAA spokesman contacted last night indicated that was unlikely. According to a statement issued by SDSU athletic director Fred Miller, Nunn tested positive for methamphetamine in a Dec. 9 test, but an "internal investigation" determined that the result was a false positive caused by use of an over-the-counter medication. Methamphetamine also is known as crystal meth, a street drug that has been called "a poor man's cocaine." David Cawood, NCAA director of communications, would not comment directly on the San Diego State case last night, but he cast doubt on the school's version. Cawood said the only appeals process "is a second test."
That is, if an athlete's urine sample tests positive the first time, the school may request another, more rigorous test. "If you're naive enough to believe that he's out of the game because of a nasal inhaler, then you write it," Cawood said.
"Since the testing started (this month), no one has been penalized for testing positive on a therapeutic drug when drug tests later clearly showed it was therapeutic." Reacting to Cawood's remarks, SDSU assistant athletic director Al Luginbill said: "We're naive enough to believe (it was nasal inhaler)." Nunn could not be reached for comment. Miller said last night that because of various commitments associated with the Holiday Bowl, he would not be available for comment until today. Nunn, a junior, is the second SDSU player to fail the NCAA test.
Starting wideout Anthony Conyers missed the Holiday Bowl, because he had tested positive for cocaine.
Conyers confirmed that he had used the drug. Miller appealed the finding in Nunn's case, his statement said, but the NCAA refused to reverse its decision.
Although Cawood said the appeals process only involves a second test, Miller's statement said the NCAA turned down the appeal, because Nunn had neglected to list the inhaler on a consent form filled out prior to the test. Cawood indicated that NCAA tests can reliably distinguish between nasal inhaler and methamphetamine. "There's a different degree of positive reactions in the test," Cawood said. In his statement, Miller said: "We do not dispute the positive reading in the tested sample.
We support what the NCAA is trying to do in its testing program.
However, our frustration lies in the fact that the appeals process in a new system with these types of time constraints involved is very inflexible. "Clarence Nunn is a first-class individual who should not inherit any of the stigma involved in a positive drug test.
He is an innocent victim of a positive test result in this situation." Miller will continue to pursue Nunn's case, the statement said.
The NCAA penalty for a positive drug test is a 90-day suspension. The dispute recalls a drug-testing case at the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich.
American swimmer Rick DeMont had to forfeit a gold medal, because the asthma medicine he had taken all his life was on a list of substances banned by the International Olympic Committee.
 Graphic



 
1 PIC; CAPTIONS: Last-play field goal leaves Aztec Levi Esene dejected. (D-5:4,5,6); PHOTOBY: San Diego Union/Russ Gilbert
 Load-Date: August 10, 2007

 

End of Document


Olympic winner 'gave advie on drug taking'
The Times (London)
January 4 1988, Monday

 Copyright 1988 Times Newspapers Limited
Section: Issue 62968.
Length: 376 words
Byline: PAT BUTCHER
Body




 Martin Girvan, the British international hammer thrower, has followed up his recent drug allegations in The Times with an account of how Yuri Sedykh, of the Soviet Union, the double Olympic champion, advised home throwers on drug intake while visiting Britain two years ago.
 Sedykh, who won his gold medals in Montreal and Moscow, was in Britain to lecture in a series of seminars when Girvan said he heard Sedykh detail what drugs he was taking, when, and in what quantities.
 Girvan said: 'The worst of it was that Sedykh was not the only man in our company taking drugs. That soon became terribly clear.'
In Sedykh's defence, it must be said that the same official encouragement for athletes to take drugs doubtless exists in the Soviet Union as in Britain, details of which we published two weeks ago.
 Girvan enlarged on the implication that home throwers were involved in taking drugs with accounts of Britons abroad for warm-weather training 'cleaning out' chemists shops of steroids.
 Girvan, aged 27, told of how he became aware of domestic use of drugs when he was 18, and on an international trip. 'I just couldn't believe my ears when I heard a coach and three competitors openly planning a competitive programme for the season, based on drugs.'
 Girvan also recalled a scene, which is both farcial and revealing, as to the extent of domestic drug taking. It was at the first British Athletics League fixture of the 1985 season, at Birmingham.
 'I arrived, and a load of throwers and team managers were in the car park, waiting to see if the newly-inaugurated competition drug-testing was going to take place. People wouldn't go into the meeting until they were sure the tester wasn't there.'
 The extent of official collusion to avoid positive drug tests was also recalled by Girvan when he cited an international match, when home athletes were warned in advanced by British officials which events were to be tested. This was prior to the match against East Germany at Crystal Palace on June 18 and 19, 1982.
 It was in that match, The Times revealed two weeks ago, that Nigel Cooper, the newly installed British Amateur Athletic Board secretary, acceded to a last-minute demand by the East German team management to waive drug testing for the visitors.
 Load-Date: September 22, 2000

 

End of Document


Pharmaceutical Company, Beset by Problems, Trying to Recover
The Associated Press
February 16, 1989, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 1032 words
Byline: By LINDSEY TANNER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: ROSEMONT, Ill.
Body




LyphoMed Inc. won nationwide prominence a few years ago when it become the only licensed maker of a drug used to fight a deadly pneumonia linked to the AIDS scourge. Since then the company has been fighting a scourge of its own: quality complaints, product recalls and plant closures.
Now LyphoMed is trying to restore customer confidence, a daunting task in a business where trust is crucial to survival. Company executives and outside analysts agree any recovery won't be smooth.
"The company does have a credibility gap that they have to fill with the major institutional investor - not only explaining what happened, but that it won't happen again," said Michael Harshbarger, an industry analyst at Hayes and Griffith, a Chicago firm that specializes in health-care investments.
In 1984, LyphoMed became the only company federally licensed to make pentamidine, used to combat a pneumonia that frequently kills people afflicted with acquired immune deficiency syndrome. LyphoMed's success seemed assured.
Three years later, inspections of LyphoMed plants by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration revealed numerous violations of what the watchdog agency calls "good manufacturing practices."
Its Grand Island, N.Y., plant still doesn't comply with FDA standards, and the Chicago and Orlando, Fla., plants have been closed permanently. But the main plant at Melrose Park, Ill., is back in compliance and a new plant under construction in Puerto Rico will replace the Florida operation.
"The worst is behind them," Harshbarger said.
In early February LyphoMed reported a $$5.8 million fourth-quarter loss and a 1988 loss of $$21.1 million, vs. a $$21 million profit in 1987.
But Harshbarger predicted 1989 "will be a watershed year … from investment, trade, turnaround, and operationally."
To strengthen senior management and avoid repeating history, LyphoMed created five new positions late last year in manufacturing, quality control, research and development and regulatory affairs.
With that team, LyphoMed has pledged to adding patented products to their existing business of injectible drugs for the critically ill.
"When we've come through a situation where the company has almost been frozen for a year because of the fact that we've been beset by so many problems ...it's a refreshing feeling for everybody to get going again," said Gary Nei, who's leading LyphoMed's revitalization plans.
Nei, 44, a veteran health-care industry executive who formerly worked at American Hospital Supply Corp., was hired in the fall for the newly created position of president and chief operating officer.
His job, Nei said, is to "bring a more disciplined and controlled environment to the corporation and, one at a time, begin to set aside the things that have plagued the company."
The first challenge is restoring customer confidence and sales, which plunged by about 50 percent last year.
LyphoMed officials decline to say how many clients have taken their business elsewhere, but Nei acknowledged in a recent interview that the FDA scrutiny "certainly led to a significant disappointment on the part of a lot of pharmacists.
"But the fact is," he said, "the company grew at (such) a rate...that we were unable to provide the necessary people and systems to control our quality systems in the face of that growth."
Annual sales totaled $$4 million in 1981, when LyphoMed was acquired from Stone Container Corp. in a management-led takeover by John Kapoor, chairman and chief executive officer. In 1987 sales totaled $$172 million, reflecting LyphoMed's success in selling drugs to large hospitals at attractive prices.
The surge laid the foundation for trouble. Among the main problems were these:
-An FDA inspection report in July 1987 on the firm's Melrose Park plant that cited improper drug-testing procedures and inadequate employee training or supervision.
-A November 1987 FDA letter that cited "serious violations" of federal law, including release of under-filled vials of drugs and failure to follow up on indications of contamination of several drugs, including pentamidine.
-A November 1987 FDA suspension of LyphoMed's applications to market new drugs until quality-control problems were corrected.
-A January 1988 company recall of amphotericin B, an antibiotic used on fungal infections, after patient complaints of high fever and chills.
-A March 1988 FDA report on a three-month inspection at the Melrose Park plant that listed 44 violations of "good manufacturing practices," similar to problems disclosed in the November 1987 letter.
-A June 1988 suspension of LyphoMed's Florida plant operations to correct quality-control problems found by the FDA.
Finally this past September under FDA orders, LyphoMed agreed to destroy or clean up hundreds of thousands of contaminated injectable drugs seized by federal authorities. It also agreed to recall some drugs that were distributed, including heparin, ascorbic acid and potassium chloride, which is commonly given to hospitalized patients with congestive heart failure.
"The firm had bad problems," said an FDA official who requested anonymity. "Out of the 100 violations we dealt with in fiscal 1987 … LyphoMed's were among the most serious...but it was not unique."
Important clients spooked off by LyphoMed's travails included University Hospital Consortium, a pharmaceutical-buying group for 48 university hospitals nationwide.
The group disapproved LyphoMed as a vendor about a year ago, and its pharmacy advisory committee voted in December "not to reinstate LyphoMed as an approved vendor through 1989," said Karen Packard, vice president of planning and marketing for the Oak Brook Terrace, Ill.-based consortium.
"We were not convinced that LyphoMed could be a consistent supplier of products" of assured quality, she said in a phone interview. But she said the consortium may restore its relationship with LyphoMed eventually.
"We would like to have them be reapproved because they provide a product that is not readily available," she said, referring to pentamidine.
Nei said LyphoMed is trying to convey the message that the company has reformed, and "we're certainly sorry over some of the inconvenience that we've caused some of our customers."
 Graphic



 
LaserPhoto planned

 

End of Document


Magistrate Grants Bond, But Wants To Know Money Source
The Associated Press
February 18, 1987, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1987 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 423 words
Dateline: MIAMI
Body




A federal magistrate granted bond Wednesday to two suspects accused of selling counterfeit birth control pills, but ordered a hearing to determine whether the bail money was tainted.
Chief U.S. Magistrate Peter Palermo granted a $100,000 corporate surety bond to Fermin Alfonso, 49, and a $50,000 bond to Beatriz Villalon, 42. But he granted a hearing to determine whether the bond money or security for the bond originated with illegally obtained funds. No date was set for the hearing.
Both were indicted on counterfeit drug and wire fraud charges, conspiracy to import and distribute the pills from Spain, and conspiracy to manufacture, import and distribute pills from Guatemala.
Alfonso and Ms. Villalon each could face 74 years in prison and fines of $442,000 if convicted.
The two were among six Miami-area residents named in an indictment unsealed Tuesday charging them with the manufacture, importation and distribution of an estimated 1 million counterfeit pills, a scheme that resulted in a national recall in 1984.
No pregnancies or illnesses were reported after the bogus Ovulen-21 packages were distributed, according to G.D. Searle and Co., which manufactures the genuine birth control pills.
"There have not been any problems that we can ascribe to it,"Searle spokeswoman Kay Bruno said.
The counterfeit pills were smuggled into the United States from 1981 until October 1984, when the first suspect pills were reported at some Midwestern pharmacies, the indictment charged.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration supervised a recall of two suspect lots, and all of the counterfeit pills were off pharmacy shelves by January 1985.
Investigators charged the counterfeit pills of undetermined effectiveness were manufactured in Barcelona, Spain, and another lot with a faulty chemical formula was produced in Guatemala City, Guatemala.
Jacques Behar and Gilberto Yurubi, Alfonso's cousin, also were charged with conspiracy on the Spanish pills and distributing counterfeit pills. They are already in an undisclosed federal prison on other charges, said Ana Barnett, a spokeswoman for U.S. Attorney Leon Kellner. She said she did not know what those other charges were.
The two others _ Edward John Peterson, 59, and Sheldon Harwin _ remained at large Wednesday, Ms. Barnett said. They were charged with conspiracy on the Spanish pills and counterfeit drug and wire fraud charges.
If convicted on all charges, Peterson faces 36 years and a $35,000 fine; Behar and Yurubi, 17 years and $60,000 fines; and Harwin, 14 years and a $40,000 fine.

 

End of Document


Nader Group Denounces Heart Valve Recall as Inadequate
The Associated Press
October 14, 1985, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1985 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 525 words
Byline: By LEE SIEGEL, AP Science Writer
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




Last week's recall of unimplanted Bjork-Shiley artificial heart valves didn't go far enough, says a Ralph Nader consumer group, alleging that about 100 people have died because the devices broke.
The recall Friday did not include valves already implanted in people or smaller valves made by Shiley Inc. of Irvine.
"Any cardiac surgeon who implants any of these valves is begging for a malpractice suit," said Dr. Sidney Wolfe, director of Nader's Public Citizen Health Research Group in Washington.
The recall covers only the larger sizes _ 29-, 31- and 33-millimeter _ of the Bjork-Shiley 60-degree Convexo-Concave heart valves manufactured between March and June 1982 by Shiley Inc., an Irvine-based subsidiary of Pfizer Inc.
"It is too late," Wolfe said Saturday of the recall, "and it's not broad enough because they're not recalling smaller valves, which also fractured."
Shiley executive vice president Frank Haskins said the recall of larger sizes was "the most responsible action to be taken at this time." He acknowledged small, metal struts also have fractured on some of the smaller valves, but said the failure rate is low.
"The valve is a good valve," Haskins said. "It's safe and effective, and there's no reason to deny patients the smaller sizes."
In a telephone interview, Wolfe said his group estimates there have been about 150 failures in all three batches of Shiley's 60-degree Convexo-Concave valve, including two batches the company recalled previously and the third batch, which now is being partially recalled. About 100 of the failures resulted in deaths, he said.
Haskins agreed with the estimate of 150 valve failures out of some 85,000 valves implanted worldwide, but said, "I don't want to specifically identify a number" of deaths.
However, he said 60 percent to 70 percent of failures result in death. Those percentages of 150 failures would mean 90 to 105 deaths.
Haskins also said about 2,700 people have received valves of the sizes and batch now being recalled. Of those, he added, there have been 21 reported failures, including 14 deaths. The latest recall applies to about 200 unimplanted valves, he added.
As with previous recalls, Friday's recall applies only to valves not yet implanted in patients who need them because their own heart valves are diseased.
Haskins and Wolfe agreed that people who already have the artificial valves shouldn't have them removed unless they start to fail, since the risk of death from open-heart surgery to remove a valve exceeds the risk of death from valve failure.
They also agreed people now wearing the valves should go to a hospital emergency room immediately if they detect possible signs of valve failure, including cessation of the valve's normal clicking noise, shortness of breath, dizziness and chest pain.
In recent years, the Nader group repeatedly and unsucessfully asked the U.S. Food and Drug Administration to recall all of the 60-degree Convexo-Concave valves.
Numerous lawsuits have been filed by relatives of patients who died, and Wolfe said the firm "settled a large number of cases for $300,000 to $500,000." Haskins replied: "As a policy, we don't discuss lawsuits."

 

End of Document


Lilly given U.S. go-ahead to sell pioneering insulin
Financial Times (London,England)
November 1, 1982, Monday

 Copyright 1982 The Financial Times Limited
Section: SECTION I; Overseas News; Pg. 3
Length: 388 words
Byline: BY PAUL BETTS IN NEW YORK
Body




THE FOOD and Drug Administration, the U.S. government regulatory agency, has given the go-ahead for Eli Lilly, the large U.S. pharmaceutical concern, to market Humulin -- the first synthetic insulin to be manufactured by the technique of k gene splicing.
The new product, which is used by diabetics, is manufactured by Lilly under licence from Genentech, a leading U.S. genetic engineering company.  In the late 1970s it was among the pioneers of recombinant DNA technology, as the gene splicing technique is known.
FDA approval for marketing of the new insulin in the world's largest drug market was given in the unusually-short time of five months.Approval can take from two to four years -- much longer than in Europe.
The product has already been approved by British health authorities.  The FDA said it had approved the drug in record time because of the vast experience with animal insulins, which are the common forms of treatment for diabetes.
The drug differs from traditional animal insulins in that it is made by biochemsts inserting genetic information from a human cell into a bacterium which then produces the drug.
In the older process the insulin is synthesised from animal glands.
FDA approval comes at a time when Lilly is still recovering from the recent blow of recalling its anti-arthritic drug Oraflex, after the medicine had been linked to several deaths in Britain and in the U.S.
The marketing of the new insulin, due to start in the U.S. next year, is not expected to have a major impact on Lilly's earnings.
The drug is unlikely to become of great commercial significance initially because it will be more expensive than animal insulin and it has no significant clinical advantages over animal insulin.
But in the longer term it could prove very important, as some experts have forecast a shortage of animal insulin in ten years' time or more.
Lilly has completed two facilities to manufacturer the synthetic insulin -- one in Indianapolis, in the U.S., and the other in Liverpool, in the U.K.
Although gene splicing has been touted as the drug technology of the future, much more research has yet to be done to produce other new drugs by this technique.
Nonetheless, the Lilly drug marks an important milestone for medicine and for genetic engineering.

 

End of Document


Generic firm temporarily shut down
United Press International
September 20, 1989, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1989 U.P.I.
Section: Financial
Length: 568 words
Byline: By REBECCA KOLBERG, UPI Science Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A New York pharmaceutical giant Wednesday temporarily shut down its generic drug subsidiary following revelations the firm may have used false data to win drug approval.
In other action, a House subcommittee announced was expanding its investigation of the scandal-riddled generic drug industry to include a brand-name drug maker, Eli Lilly & Co. of Indianapolis.
Carol Emerling, a spokeswoman for American Home Products Corp., confirmed that the company's Quantum Pharmics Ltd. plant in Amityville, N.Y., voluntarily halted production and distribution of generic drugs.
Emerling said the shutdown was ''to facilitate'' investigations by the firm and the Food and Drug Administration. She offered no further explanation and said Quantum would reopen ''as soon as possible.''
Rep. John Dingell, D-Mich., who is spearheading the congressional investigation into generic drugs, said a Quantum official told his staff the closure stemmed from ''serious discrepancies'' in drug applications.
A congressional aide, who asked not to be identified, said the problems apparently involved ''falsification.'' The aide added, ''They stopped production and they stopped shipments, which means it is pretty serious.''
An FDA spokesman said ''some data appears to have been misrepresented to the agency'' during the approval of three Quantum drugs.
None of Quantum's 21 generic drug products was recalled, Emerling said.
''Nothing has come to our attention that causes concern with regard to safety and efficacy,'' said the spokeswoman.
American Home Products began acquiring Quantum in 1986; previously the company was privately held.
The FDA is currently confronting a scandal stemming from the recent bribery convictions of three of its own officials and startling revelations of corruption within the generic industry.
Generic drugs are supposed to be chemically equivalent to brand-name drugs with expired patents. About 200 companies make generics, which are generally cheaper than brand-name products and make up as much as one-third of the U.S. prescription drug market.
In a letter sent to Lilly Wednesday, Dingell said sources have indicated the brand-name manufacturer may have ''substantial problems similar to those uncovered in the generic drug industry.''
He also said an FDA report found that ''callous and cavalier business practices were commonplace in (Lilly's) Indianapolis plant.''
FDA spokesman Don McLearn said manufacturing problems similar to those detected at some generic firms were found at Lilly, but no evidence of fraud has been uncovered. The Lilly plant has voluntarily stopped shipment of drugs, he said.
Lilly spokesman Edward West said he could not comment on the latest development because he had not seen Dingell's letter.
Last week, FDA officials told Congress they found signs of cheating or critical manufacturing problems at 11 of 13 generic drug firms checked out so far. In addition to those investigations, the FDA last month began comprehensive inspections of the nation's top 20 generic drug firms, including Quantum.
At least 29 drugs have been recalled and production of another 141 have been suspended in the wake of the widening scandal, the FDA said.
The shutdown of Quantum will put 55 of the plant's 100 workers on temporary layoff status. Emerling said Quantum accounts for only a small percentage of overall sales for the New York-based American Home Products, which employs 48,000 people.

 

End of Document


Generic firm temporarily shut down
United Press International
September 20, 1989, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1989 U.P.I.
Section: Washington News
Length: 568 words
Byline: By REBECCA KOLBERG, UPI Science Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A New York pharmaceutical giant Wednesday temporarily shut down its generic drug subsidiary following revelations the firm may have used false data to win drug approval.
In other action, a House subcommittee announced was expanding its investigation of the scandal-riddled generic drug industry to include a brand-name drug maker, Eli Lilly & Co. of Indianapolis.
Carol Emerling, a spokeswoman for American Home Products Corp., confirmed that the company's Quantum Pharmics Ltd. plant in Amityville, N.Y., voluntarily halted production and distribution of generic drugs.
Emerling said the shutdown was ''to facilitate'' investigations by the firm and the Food and Drug Administration. She offered no further explanation and said Quantum would reopen ''as soon as possible.''
Rep. John Dingell, D-Mich., who is spearheading the congressional investigation into generic drugs, said a Quantum official told his staff the closure stemmed from ''serious discrepancies'' in drug applications.
A congressional aide, who asked not to be identified, said the problems apparently involved ''falsification.'' The aide added, ''They stopped production and they stopped shipments, which means it is pretty serious.''
An FDA spokesman said ''some data appears to have been misrepresented to the agency'' during the approval of three Quantum drugs.
None of Quantum's 21 generic drug products was recalled, Emerling said.
''Nothing has come to our attention that causes concern with regard to safety and efficacy,'' said the spokeswoman.
American Home Products began acquiring Quantum in 1986; previously the company was privately held.
The FDA is currently confronting a scandal stemming from the recent bribery convictions of three of its own officials and startling revelations of corruption within the generic industry.
Generic drugs are supposed to be chemically equivalent to brand-name drugs with expired patents. About 200 companies make generics, which are generally cheaper than brand-name products and make up as much as one-third of the U.S. prescription drug market.
In a letter sent to Lilly Wednesday, Dingell said sources have indicated the brand-name manufacturer may have ''substantial problems similar to those uncovered in the generic drug industry.''
He also said an FDA report found that ''callous and cavalier business practices were commonplace in (Lilly's) Indianapolis plant.''
FDA spokesman Don McLearn said manufacturing problems similar to those detected at some generic firms were found at Lilly, but no evidence of fraud has been uncovered. The Lilly plant has voluntarily stopped shipment of drugs, he said.
Lilly spokesman Edward West said he could not comment on the latest development because he had not seen Dingell's letter.
Last week, FDA officials told Congress they found signs of cheating or critical manufacturing problems at 11 of 13 generic drug firms checked out so far. In addition to those investigations, the FDA last month began comprehensive inspections of the nation's top 20 generic drug firms, including Quantum.
At least 29 drugs have been recalled and production of another 141 have been suspended in the wake of the widening scandal, the FDA said.
The shutdown of Quantum will put 55 of the plant's 100 workers on temporary layoff status. Emerling said Quantum accounts for only a small percentage of overall sales for the New York-based American Home Products, which employs 48,000 people.

 

End of Document


Ninth Tainted Capsule Found, FDA Ready For False Alarms
The Associated Press
March 22, 1986, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1986 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 716 words
Byline: By BILL STIEG, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PHILADELPHIA
Body




Federal technicians examining samples of three popular medications found traces of rat poison in a ninth capsule Saturday as the products were pulled from shelves in stores and medicine cabinets.
SmithKline Beckman Corp. of Philadelphia reported 2,100 calls by Saturday to a toll-free phone number handling refund and information requests from customers who bought Contac for colds, Teldrin for allergies, or Dietac for weight loss, the three drugs recalled after rat poison was found.
The FBI was investigating the tampering and phone calls from a man calling himself "Gary" who told a store, news organizations and SmithKline that he poisoned capsules in Houston, St. Louis, Chicago and Orlando, Fla.
Warfarin, an anti-coagulant and the active ingredient in rat poison, was found in a capsule of Teldrin on Saturday, said Food an Drug Administration spokesman Bill Grigg. Six capsules of Contac, one of Teldrin and one of Dietac were found contaminated with warfarin on Friday. All nine tainted capsules were from stores in Houston and Orlando.
No injuries had been reported and the amount of poison in the capsules would sicken but not kill a person, according to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Consumers were told not to use any capsules purchased after March 15.
FDA and FBI technicians continued examining capsules from the four cities, testing for cyanide, warfarin and other foreign substances, said FDA spokesman Bruce Brown.
In San Francisco, an "obviously tampered with" package of 10 Contac capsules was examined by police for fingerprints and will be sent to FDA labs to be tested for contamination, police Inspector Victor Fleming said at a news conference Saturday. He said police had no other similar reports.
The owner of a San Francisco market discovered the tampering Saturday, said Fleming.
There were tiny holes in the package backing behind two of the 10 capsules and small particles had spilled outside seven of the capsules and into the clear plastic covering them, he said.
Police in Winona, Minn., said Saturday they were asking state authorities to examine Contac capsules turned in by a customer who suspected they had been tampered with.
Spokesmen for SmithKline and the FDA played down reports of a call to a Houston television station by a man _ who did not sound like "Gary" _ who said he tampered with Sine-Off capsules, a SmithKline sinus medication. One store chain pulled the product from Houston-area stores.
"The FBI and FDA have determined that it was a crank call, a copycat," said Alan Wachter, spokesman for SmithKline, adding that there was no recall of Sine-Off.
Brown said the FDA had nothing new to report Saturday, adding, "With respect to SmithKline, we're finished. The false alarms will continue, unfortunately."
Last month, Johnson & Johnson recalled 22 million packages of Tylenol capsules and stopped using capsules after one filled with cyanide killed a New York woman.
The national trade organization for non-prescription medicine urged consumers to carefully check all such medications before purchase.
"Personal vigilance is necessary," said Alice Kimball, a spokeswoman for the United States Pharmacopeial Convention in Rockville, Md. "No matter how good a program of drug testing, regulations and protective packaging may be devised, total security cannot be provided against all the possibilities that individuals may invent to tamper with medicines."
"It is getting very tiresome," said Thomas Woods, manager of a downtown Philadelphia Rite-Aid drug store. "It's the same old thing over and over again. The customers really suffer _ they don't know what to take."
A customer at an Albertsons store in Orlando, Fla. _ an alleged target of tampering _ said she looks at all such products closely.
"I don't think I'm going to let some nut decide what I buy. I hope the FBI gets busy and catches these people soon," customer Judy Klimscheck said.
SmithKline president Henry Wendt, who has called the phone calls "a terrorist threat," said the company would continue making Contac, a popular cold relief medicine; Dietac, for weight loss; and Teldrin, for allergies, and planned to reintroduce the products, probably later this year.
He said the three drugs account for less than 3 percent, or about $100 million, of the firm's $3.4 billion in annual sales.

 

End of Document


SmithKline Recalls Poison-Tampered Capsules
The Associated Press
March 22, 1986, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1986 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 730 words
Byline: By LEE LINDER, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: PHILADELPHIA
Body




Contac and two other over-the-counter medications were recalled nationwide after rat poison was found in eight capsules, and the FBI is looking for those responsible for the "latest wave of terror."
"We're dealing with a deliberate, terrorist, criminal act," Frank Young, commissioner of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, said Friday.
FDA and FBI investigators found warfarin, an anti-coagulant and the active ingredient in rat poison, in six capsules of Contac, one of Teldrin and one of Dietac, according to SmithKline Bekman Corp. spokesman Alan Wachter.
The tainted capsules came from stores in Houston and Orlando, Fla.
Meanwhile, Sine-Off capsules, also made by SmithKline, were removed from some stores in the Houston area after a man called a local television station saying he had tampered with them, FDA spokeswoman Sheryl Baylor said. Samples of the capsules were flown to New York for testing.
No injuries have been reported. The amount of poison found in each capsule would sicken but not kill a person, said Henry Wendt, SmithKline president. The company voluntarily withdrew the products and will reimburse consumers.
"No one likes to be accused of surrendering to a terrorist threat," Wendt said. "But our first priority is the welfare of the public, and that is why we are in the health care business."
Consumers were told not to use any of the three products bought after March 15.
The FBI is investigating phone calls made by a man calling himself Gary to SmithKline, at least one store, radio and television stations and police. The caller said cyanide and rat poison had been put in the drug packages in stores in Houston, Orlando, St. Louis and Chicago.
No poison-tainted capsules from St. Louis or Chicago had been found.
"This is a random act of violence perpetrated on the public," Wendt said Friday on the MacNeil-Lehrer Report. "It's in the same category as a bomb on an airport or on an airplane, or a hostage situation."
He said SmithKline will cooperate with the FDA and FBI "to apprehend the individual or individuals responsible for this latest wave of terror."
It is the second time this year a major U.S. drug firm recalled products.
Johnson & Johnson recalled 22 million packages of Tylenol capsules, and stopped using capsules, after one tainted with cyanide killed a woman.
Wendt said SmithKline would continue to manufacture capsules of Contac, a cold relief medicine; Dietac, for weight loss; and Teldrin, for allergies, and planned to reintroduce the products, probably later this year.
He said the loss of business wouldn't hurt SmithKline economically since the three drugs account for less than 3 percent, or about $100 million, of the firm's $3.4 billion in annual sales.
Switching to another kind of pill is one option being considered, he said.
Wendt said the Houston calls about Sine-Off did not appear to be the same caller as in the earlier instances. The Sine-Off capsules were removed from Randall's food stores and samples will be tested.
Young said "Gary" had made anonymous calls to radio stations and newspapers identifying specific stores where capsules that had been tampered with could be found. Young would not name the stores.
Young said the caller demanded that officials publicize the fact the capsules could and were being tampered with, and demanded that all capsules be withdrawn.
Julia Wallace, coordinating national editor at USA Today, said the paper got four calls Thursday and Friday from a man identifying himself as Gary.
The man said SmithKline "is making a joke of this" and that the company failed to disclose that at least seven boxes, three purchased by the public, had been doctored with cyanide, she said.
He threatened "a lot and I do mean a lot of cyanide poisoning" unless the company announced a complete recall, she said.
Thomas Collins, SmithKline vice president of corporate affairs, said he took several of the calls and described "Gary" as "an articulate man with no accent" but said his tone was threatening.
Tampering with a drug to cause injury is a federal crime punishable by five years in prison and a $25,000 fine. If injury occurs the maximum penalty could be life imprisonment.
Wendt said he had no idea how many packages were involved in the recall. Consumers in the continental United States and Hawaii seeking information about the recall can call 1-800-543-3434; in Alaska, the number is 1-800-545-1000.

 

End of Document


Radio program brings O'Connor, Koch together
The San Diego Union-Tribune
December 18, 1986 Thursday

 Copyright 1986 The San Diego Union-Tribune
Section: LOCAL; Pg. B-3
Length: 349 words
Byline: John McLaren, Tribune Staff Writer
Body




For a while this week, the mayors of San Diego and New York City had a hard time communicating.
Finally, it took a radio program to bring them together. First, the New York mayor, Ed Koch, canceled a trip to San Diego, just a few hours before he was to depart, so he could fly to Albany, the New York state capital, on a political rescue mission for his city's subway system. Later Tuesday, Koch was thwarted in his initial attempts to reach San Diego Mayor O'Connor by phone to express his regrets, and his hopes that the visit could be rescheduled. Yesterday, the two municipal executives finally were able to talk, through the medium of O'Connor's monthly radio show, "Talk to the Mayor," on station KFMB. The normal noon starting time of the program was pushed ahead two hours to accommodate both Koch and the San Diego Chamber of Commerce, which had scheduled a luncheon yesterday at which Koch was to have been the main attraction.
The luncheon was canceled and the chamber is sending refunds totaling about $9,000 to people who had bought tickets. Koch spent most of his 15 minutes on the air with O'Connor discussing his ideas for coping with the illegal drug trade.
Describing the $100 bill as "the biggest currency for drug pushers," Koch suggested that the nation's $60 billion supply of the bills be recalled as an anti-drug measure. "If they (pushers) were using $5, $10 or $20 bills, they'd get a hernia because of the number of bills they would have to carry," said Koch, who is well known for his outspokenness. Koch also said he would like a "rain check" on his scrubbed San Diego trip.
Today, aides to both mayors said they would confer after the holidays about setting up a new date for a Koch visit to San Diego. As for the subway problem, Lee Jones, a spokesman for Koch, said the mayor apparently was successful in "holding back the tide" on a state Senate plan to cut the subway subsidy. During a meeting last September in New York, Koch had suggested deploying troops along the border to intercept narcotics smugglers.
O'Connor disagreed, and urged Koch to come to San Diego.
 Load-Date: August 10, 2007

 

End of Document


FDA Recalls Nursoy Brand Infant Formula
The Associated Press
March 3, 1982, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1982 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 326 words
Byline: By BETTY ANNE WILLIAMS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Food and Drug Administration announced the recall of two kinds of Nursoy brand infant formulas Wednesday because the products do not contain vitamin B6, a nutrient whose absence can lead to convulsions.
The products are 13-ounce cans of Nursoy concentrated liquid and 32-ounce cans of Nursoy ready-to-feed. The single line codes on the ends of the cans being recalled are A26M, B2M and B9M for Nursoy concentrated liquid and A28M and B11M for Nursoy ready-to-feed. The codes may be preceded or followed by a number such as 1, 2 or 3, but those numbers can be ignored. An example of the code is "Nursoy concentrate 2A26M."
About 265,000 cans of Nursoy concentrate and 306,000 cans of Nursoy ready-to-feed in the two sizes have been distributed in the United States. But none of the product, manufactured by Wyeth Laboratories Inc. of Philadelphia, has been distributed in Canada or other foreign countries. The company cooperated with FDA in conducting the recall.
The two formulas were manufactured at Wyeth Laboratories Inc. plants in Mason, Mich., between last Jan. 26 and Feb. 11. They may have been available for sale in all 50 states since Feb. 1.
The FDA warning says parents should return all cans bearing the recalled codes to the place of purchase for refund or for replacement.
Vitamin B6 is an essential nutrient in the diet of an infant. Its absence for more than a few weeks may cause health effects ranging from irritability to convulsions.
The FDA said parents whose infants have consumed the recalled formulas as their only source of vitamins should contact their physicians for advice.
Both products are soy-based formulas sold for feeding infants who may be allergic to milk-based formulas. Neither the company nor FDA has received reports of illnesses, the FDA said.
The company detected the vitamin B6 deficiency during nutrient analysis of its products. Wyeth contacted FDA on Tuesday after receiving confirmation of the vitamin deficiency.

 

End of Document


THE DOCTOR'S WORLD
The New York Times
September 22, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

 Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Page 2, Column 1; Science Desk
Length: 959 words
Byline: By LAWRENCE K. ALTMAN, M.D.
Body




STORIES of the development of new drugs and other medical advances often are told as if logic had dictated every step, as if the researchers had known from the beginning what they were looking for and exactly how to find it. In fact, the development of new drugs is a much more complicated process than some res earchers would have the public believe, and the new drugs that appear each year reach the market by many more paths than we realize.
Clearly some developments do reflect logical deductions from planned research. But the development process also involves such nonscientific factors, as perseverance and luck. Researchers have discovered new therapies, for example, by: drawing new conclusions from accidental findings; paying attention to the observations of patients; turning unwanted side effects into something of value, and finding new uses for old drugs.
Dr Lawrence A ltman comment discusses development of new drugs
Now, in one of the most unusual stories in the annals of pharmacology, a drug marketed for one purpose - and removed from the market because it was too toxic - has returned to the practice of medicine, but for an entirely new purpose.
The drug is aminoglutethimide. In 1960, Ciba-Geigy marketed it as Elipten, for use as a supplemental drug in the treatment of epilepsy. Then, in 1966, Elipten was withdrawn from the market because of side effects involving the adrenal glands. This pair of glands produce vital hormones and are located on top of the kidneys. (Their name, adrenal, is simply Latin for ''near the kidneys.'')
Now, Ciba-Geigy is marketing Elipten again for use in treating certain adrenal hormonal disorders. The company has renamed it Cytadren, from the Greek word kytos, meaning a cover, and from the name of the glands themselves. According to recent reports, the drug has benefited some women with advanced breast cancer, and holds promise in the treatment of other cancers.
Officials of the Food and Drug Administration say they cannot recall any other drug that has been marketed for an entirely new use after being withdrawn for its original purpose.
Cytadren's comeback story offers unusual insights into the discovery of drug therapies, as well as the nature of the pharmaceutical industry and the Federal Government. Ciba-Geigy already had recouped its investment in Elipten by the time of its withdrawal from the market, an official of the company said, and the company was not certain there was any future to the drug for other purposes.
However, they were strongly encouraged by independent researchers to explore the use of Elipten for the treatment of certain hormonal disorders as well as of advanced breast and other cancers.
Ciba-Geigy researchers, and others at medical centers funded by the National Institutes of Health, turned Elipten's liability into an advantage. One of its undesirable effects as an anti-epileptic drug had been reduced production of vital hormones by normally active adrenal glands, leading to such possible symptoms as weakness, fatigue, low blood pressure, diffuse tanning of the skin, dehydration, and ultimately death.
However, some people suffer from overactive adrenal glands, a potentially fatal condition called Cushing's syndrome after the famous brain surgeon, Dr. Harvey Cushing, who described it in 1932.
Cushing's syndrome is uncommon. One of its most distinctive features is a peculiar distribution of fat, which collects in the face and upper back as a ''buffalo hump'' and on the abdomen, while sparing the arms and legs. Cushing's syndrome is also characterized by retention of salt and water, high blood pressure, weakening of bone and connective tissue, and diabetes, among other things.
As soon as Ciba-Geigy stopped marketing the drug, it immediately classified Elipten as an Investigational New Drug, thus furnishing a supply for those epileptic patients still taking it and allowing researchers to explore new uses. One possibility: : Could patients with Cushing's syndrome take Elipten pills in conjunction with radiation to avoid surgery to remove their overactive adrenal glands?
The body's hormonal system is enormously complex, dependent on the synthesis of chemicals in the body as well as the interrelationships among the various hormones. For example, the production of hormones by the adrenal glands is under the control of other hormones produced by the brain.
Researchers found that this drug produced adrenal insufficiency by preventing the normal conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone, which is the first of several steps in the body's synthesis of important hormones, including sex hormones. The drug also blocks other reactions in the adrenal glands.
 
By 1973, se ven years after Elipten was withdrawn from the market, Food and Drug Administration officials wrote Ciba-Geigy to suggest that it submi t a New Drug Application for the use of Elipten in treating Cush ing's syndrome. Last April, after further research and approval by t he Federal drug agency, Ciba-Geigy marketed Elipten as Cytadren. By then, Ciba-Geigy's patent had expired.
Cytadren has been used in various ways to treat Cushing's syndrome. One is suppression production of hormones by over-active adrenal glands before surgery on t he glands themselve s. Another is as a medical therapy in conjunction with radiation treatment, thereby achieving through chemistry what previously c ould be accomplished only by surgery.
Cytadren is not the only drug available in the treatment of Cushing's syndrome and advanced cancer. Nevertheless, it is a valuable addition to the medical armamentarium for a difficult-totreat condition. And, although Cytadren's case appears unique so far, who knows how many other drugs in the pharmaceutical graveyard may yet come back to be useful?
 Graphic



 
Illustrations: Photo of Dr. Harvey Cushing

 

End of Document


Hoechst warns on 'cheap drugs'
Financial Times (London,England)
April 5, 1982, Monday

 Copyright 1982 The Financial Times Limited
Section: SECTION I; Pg. 16
Length: 389 words
Byline: BY SUE CAMERON, CHEMICALS CORRESPONDENT, IN LONDON
Body




HOECHST UK - part of the West German-based chemicals concern - has warned that the widespread replacement of brand named-drugs by cheaper generic ones "would eventually destroy the UK pharmaceutical industry."
The warning reflects growing fears among Britain's pharmaceutical companies that the Government may be considering new regulations that would make it easier to substitute generic - unbranded - drugs for higher - priced branded ones.  The aim of such a move would be to cut the nation's drugs bill by as much as £80m ($143m) a year.
Mr Brian Cromie, chairman of Hoechst UK's pharmaceutical division, is among those who have launched a strong attack on the idea of substitution.
"If substitution were allowed," he said "doctors would no longer know what was being dispensed, patients would be confused, products would not have the legal and moral backing of a major manufacturer, drug recalls would be difficult or impossible, and the UK pharmaceutical industry, which has made such a major contribution to medicine and to the country's economy, would gradually be lost."
Meanwhile, the Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry, which represents most of the major drug companies operating in the UK, has hurriedly produced a pamphlet etitled The Importance of Brand Names.
It claims the increased use of generics would not cut Britain's anual drugs bill by more than about 3 per cent.  It says this saving would represent only some 50 per cent of the cost of developing a single new medicine.
The industry's anxiety stems from speculation about an official report that is now with Ministers at the Department of Health and Social Security.  The report has just been completed by a working party - composed mainly of officials and representatives of the British Medical Association - that was set up last year to look into the effective prescribing of drugs.
It is generally believed to call for local pharmacists to be able to substitute generic drugs for branded ones - unless a doctor insists otherwise by marking the prescription form.  The drug companies fear that many doctors would not bother, and they argue that pharmacists would have to substitute whenever possible because they would only have the cost of the cheaper, generic drugs reimbursed by the National Health Service.

 

End of Document


FDA Recalls Nursoy Brand Infant Formula
The Associated Press
March 3, 1982, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1982 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 326 words
Byline: By BETTY ANNE WILLIAMS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Food and Drug Administration announced the recall of two kinds of Nursoy brand infant formulas Wednesday because the products do not contain vitamin B6, a nutrient whose absence can lead to convulsions.
The products are 13-ounce cans of Nursoy concentrated liquid and 32-ounce cans of Nursoy ready-to-feed. The single line codes on the ends of the cans being recalled are A26M, B2M and B9M for Nursoy concentrated liquid and A28M and B11M for Nursoy ready-to-feed. The codes may be preceded or followed by a number such as 1, 2 or 3, but those numbers can be ignored. An example of the code is "Nursoy concentrate 2A26M."
About 265,000 cans of Nursoy concentrate and 306,000 cans of Nursoy ready-to-feed in the two sizes have been distributed in the United States. But none of the product, manufactured by Wyeth Laboratories Inc. of Philadelphia, has been distributed in Canada or other foreign countries. The company cooperated with FDA in conducting the recall.
The two formulas were manufactured at Wyeth Laboratories Inc. plants in Mason, Mich., between last Jan. 26 and Feb. 11. They may have been available for sale in all 50 states since Feb. 1.
The FDA warning says parents should return all cans bearing the recalled codes to the place of purchase for refund or for replacement.
Vitamin B6 is an essential nutrient in the diet of an infant. Its absence for more than a few weeks may cause health effects ranging from irritability to convulsions.
The FDA said parents whose infants have consumed the recalled formulas as their only source of vitamins should contact their physicians for advice.
Both products are soy-based formulas sold for feeding infants who may be allergic to milk-based formulas. Neither the company nor FDA has received reports of illnesses, the FDA said.
The company detected the vitamin B6 deficiency during nutrient analysis of its products. Wyeth contacted FDA on Tuesday after receiving confirmation of the vitamin deficiency.

 

End of Document


Too Early To Blame E-Ferol For Babies' Deaths, Doctor Says
The Associated Press
April 14, 1984, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1984 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 425 words
Byline: By BILL VALE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: CINCINNATI
Body




The doctor who first reported unusual symptoms in underweight infants given injections of E-Ferol Aqueous Solution vitamins says he isn't sure the product killed 12 babies nationally.
"I'm not sure what killed them. It's too premature to tell what went wrong," said Dr. Donald Frank, director of pediatrics and neonatology at Cincinnati's Good Samaritan Hospital.
Two babies died at Good Samaritan in early March and another remains in critical condition after getting E-Ferol injections, Frank said.
All told, he said, 20 premature and underweight babies received the injections. The other infants "are doing fine," he added.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration has recalled the product, which is manufactured by Carter-Glogau of Glendale, Ariz., and distributed by O'Neal, Jones & Feldman of St. Louis. FDA officials now say the product _ which was purchased by 72 hospitals around the nation _ must be considered a drug and undergo testing.
Frank and Dr. Donald Fischer, the hospital's medical director, said they believed they were following the latest medical recommendations in treating the babies.
"Vitamin E, if you want to call it a drug, has been approved for years and years," Fischer said. "We don't know the (FDA) rules. We go on the basis of a reputable drug company."
The National Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta requested the recall after 12 babies died and 17 others got ill after reportedly getting injections of the product.
The infants developed an "unusual syndrome" that included fluid in the abdomen, enlarged spleens and livers, CDC officials said.
"I have been practicing for 30 years and this is the first time I had seen this occur and it set off a red light," said Frank, who notified the CDC.
Frank said the Academy of Neonatology had recommended stronger doses of vitamin E for premature babies undergoing oxygen treatments to prevent blindness and promote growth.
"This was the first product we'd seen with that increased dosage," he said.
Frank said a preliminary study conducted at Good Samaritan by Dr. Robert Gaynes of the CDC was inconclusive.
He said his assistant, Dr. Niki Kosmetatos, suspended the use of E-Ferol on April 6 when Gaynes told him infants had died at a second hospital.
Fischer said Good Samaritan's remaining E-Ferol has been locked up pending further action by the FDA. Frank said the hospital now is injecting underweight babies with multiple vitamins containing less vitamin E.
Infant deaths and illnesses also were reported at the University of Tennessee hospital and at a Spokane, Wash., hospital.

 

End of Document


QUALITY OF ARTIFICIAL HEART VALVES IS ASSAILED
The New York Times
September 20, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

 Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 565 words
Byline: By IRVIN MOLOTSKY
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Sept. 19
Body




The former manager of quality control for the manufacturer of artificial heart valves that have been linked to at least 64 deaths asserted today that the company had rejected his suggestions to improve the quality of the devices.
 The former manager, Larry G. Hamilton, became the second former employee of the company, the Shiley Division of Pfizer Inc., to make such a charge. Last month George Sherry, a tool design engineer, asserted that there were welding defects in the valves.
Larry G Hamilton, former manager of quality control for Shiley Division of Pfizer Inc, manufacturer of artificial heart valves that have been linked to at least 64 deaths, asserts that company had rejected his suggestions to improve quality of devices (M)
Mr. Hamilton made his assertion in a telephone news conference arranged by the Health Research Group, a consumer organization that had also made arrangements for Mr. Sherry to speak. Mr. Hamilton spoke from an unidentified medical devices company in California where he has worked since January after leaving Shiley.
The director of the Health Research Group, Dr. Sidney M. Wolfe, estimated that 57,000 people had had the device, the Bjork-Shiley 60-Degree Convexo- Concave heart valve, implanted.
 
Findings of Federal Study
Dr. Wolfe also released findings from a Food and Drug Administration study that found that Shiley had been informed in May 1981 by a testing laboratory of potential valve failures. That report, Dr. Wolfe said, found that the stress produced by the human heart was almost 90 percent of the strength of the welds used to weld struts to the valves.
In a letter to Dr. Frank Young, the Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, Allen Greenberg, a lawyer for the Health Research Group, said that Shiley had told the F.D.A. in 1982 that perhaps only 20 percent of the valve failures had been reported. Mr. Greenberg and Dr. Wolfe contended that this was because in many deaths of elderly recipients of the valves, autopsies that might disclose valve failure are not performed.
Mr. Greenberg said that if Shiley's estimate was correct, the fatalities may total closer to 320.
 
F.D.A. Defends Valve
Shiley, which has its headquarters in Irvine, Calif., had not responded to a telephoned request for comment by this evening.
At the Food and Drug Administration, William Grigg, a spokesman, said, ''The data we have seen continue to show that the valve's special benefits outweigh its problems.''
''We will, of course, talk with Mr. Hamilton, just as we did with Mr. Sherry,'' Mr. Grigg said.
Dr. Wolfe suggested that people who had received implants of the Bjork- Shiley Convexo-Concave heart valves discuss the matter with their physicians to make sure that family doctors and heart surgeons were aware of them.
The symptoms of a malfunctioning artificial heart valve include shortness of breath, dizziness and chest pain. Most important, Dr. Wolfe said, the patient will notice the absence of the clicking noise the valve makes as it opens and closes a disk that regulates the flow of blood in the heart. In valve failures, Dr. Wolfe said, welded struts holding the disks break.
Dr. Wolfe is asking that the Food and Drug Administration recall the valves that have not yet been implanted and that Shiley be required to send a letter explaining the situation to all physicians. The company has already sent such a letter to heart surgeons.

 

End of Document


FDA Wants Immediate Reports on Bad Drug Reactions
The Associated Press
March 21, 1985, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1985 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 427 words
Byline: By WILLIAM KRONHOLM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Food and Drug Administration, citing a loophole that may have cost the lives of 30 infants, proposed regulations Thursday requiring drug companies to file immediate reports to the government on serious reactions to any prescription drug.
The new rules, if adopted, would extend reporting requirements to the approximately 10 percent of prescription drugs not now covered. Most of the exempt drugs are older products, developed before 1938 and not subject to many of the FDA's more recent approval requirements.
FDA Commissioner Frank E. Young said the regulations were prompted by incidents in late 1983 and early 1984, when some 1,000 premature infants were given a new intravenous form of vitamin E products that had long been on the market and were exempt from the reporting requirements.
High dosages of the substance, E-Ferol, were prescribed in an effort to prevent an eye condition often associated with prematurity. But the high dosages now are suspected in the deaths of about 30 of the infants.
The tragedy was compounded because there was no requirement to report the deaths to FDA, Young said. As a result, he said, the agency did not know of the problem until two hospitals noticed the problems among their own patients and asked the Centers for Disease Control to investigate.
When the CDC alerted the FDA, the drug agency launched a recall. But Young said the FDA might have learned of the problem sooner if E-Ferol had been subject to the reaction reporting requirement.
"The new rules eliminate a reporting loophole that was recognized following the E-Ferol tragedy," Young said. "By broadening the reporting requirements to cover all marketed prescription drugs, today's proposed regulations should eliminate such tragic health consequences."
The proposal would require drug marketers to report to the FDA _ immediately, but in no case more than 15 days later _ of any serious, unexpected adverse drug reaction or any significant increase in serious reactions.
The regulations, if adopted in their present form, would extend the reporting requirements to an estimated 4,200 drugs that now are exempt. They include epinephrine, a heart stimulant; the pain-killers morphine and codeine and vitamin products used in medical treatment.
While the old drugs have been in use for 50 years or more without known safety problems, the exemption also covers some new versions of the old products and prescriptions at higher than normal dosages and use among high-risk populations, the agency said.
The proposed regulations are subject to public comment for 60 days.

 

End of Document


OLYMPICS; Credibility Is in Question
The New York Times
May 28, 1989, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

 Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 8; Page 10, Column 1; Sports Desk
Length: 933 words
Byline: By MICHAEL JANOFSKY
Dateline: TORONTO, May 27
Body




In three days of testimony last week, the doctor who managed Ben Johnson's steroid program for five years showed himself to be a witness of questionable credibility. At the same time, Dr. George (Jamie) Astaphan might have provided a smoking gun that could doom Johnson's chances of ever running in the Olympics again.
Throughout the track and field phase of the Canadian Government inquiry into the use of performance-enhancing drugs by athletes, the dominant story line has been Johnson's rise to world supremacy by using banned drugs through his fall at the Seoul Olympics eight months ago, when he tested positive for the steroid stanozolol after the 100-meter final.
Testimony from a variety of witnesses has showed that no one played a more prominent role in Johnson's ascent than Astaphan, a 43-year-old family doctor from St. Kitts, who admitted to knowing almost nothing about steroids when Johnson first met him in 1983. By last Friday, Astaphan's own testimony has left an unmistakable impression that what he learned might have enabled him to play the most prominent role in Johnson's demise.
While Astaphan and other witnessess have agreed on many details of the drug programs the doctor had designed for Johnson and others, one important question remains: who provided the drug found in Johnson's urine sample in Seoul?
Astaphan tried to deflect stares his way by clinging to his contention that the drug Johnson used most often was neither Winstrol tablets nor its veterinary form, Winstrol-V, an injectible, both of which contain stanozolol, but Miotolin, a Japanese brand of injectible furazabol that he called ''Estragol'' at the request of an East German athlete who, he said, supplied him 48 bottles of the drug in 1985.
 
Subterfuge Called Necessary
Astaphan, whose testimony will continue Monday, told the inquiry that the athlete - who went nameless - had made it clear that subterfuge was necessary to keep ''the damn Americans'' from discovering the true identity of the drug. It was supposed to be that effective, and as a further precaution, Astaphan removed the labels from each bottle.
Witnesses have agreed on the chain of custody. Astaphan gave most of the bottles to Charlie Francis, Johnson's coach, who later turned them over to Angella Issajenko, Canada's top female sprinter, because, as Francis testified, too many people had keys to his apartment. Once the inquiry began, Issajenko turned over 12 of the remaining bottles for chemical analysis.
One test showed that the contents of the bottles included stanozolol; a second test of five bottles showed that the contents matched the elements in Winstrol-V.
That would seem to be enough circumstantial evidence to suspect Astaphan's direct complicity in Johnson's positive test. But there has been more:
* Astaphan insisted he told those who initially received the Estragol -Johnson, Francis, Issajenko and one other athlete he could not recall -that the drug was Miotolin and the reason for the deception. Francis and Issajenko testified they knew the drug only as furazabol or Estragol. Neither mentioned an East German or Miotolin.
* Tim Bethune, a 400-meter sprinter, testified last month that once, while in Astaphan's office to receive drugs, he noticed an empty box of Winstrol-V in the waste-paper basket.
* Dave McKnight and Mike Sokolowski, former sprinters, testified that they had received Winstrol tablets from Astaphan.
* Invoices from a drug company in Canada entered into evidence showed that Astaphan had purchased 6,500 Winstrol-V tablets and 68 vials of the injectible form of the drug between 1985 and 1987.
* While Astaphan acknowledged giving Winstrol to McKnight and Sokolowski, he said that the bulk orders were always for his friend Don Hiatt, an American businessman in St. Kitts who testified that he needed the drugs to beef up his cattle, which he sold to local citizens for consumption. ''He also had friends involved with race horses,'' Astaphan said of Hiatt.
 
Judge Shows Amazement
By late in the day Friday, both Charles Dubin, the Ontario judge presiding over the inquiry, and Robert Armstrong, the inquiry chief counsel, seemed amazed that Astaphan would continue to deny what Armstrong called ''the overwhelming inference'' that the drug Johnon had been using all along was Winstol-V.
''No,'' Astaphan said. ''I don't agree.''
As for Johnson, who is scheduled to begin testifying June 12, his future in track and field is highly dependent upon the way he is portrayed in Dubin's final report to Jean Charest, Canada's Minister of Sport. For now, Johnson is subject to a number of sanctions, including a two-year ban imposed by the International Amateur Athletics Federation and the loss of his Federal funding.
The Canada Olympic Association, which could ban Johnson from the 1991 Pan American Games and the 1992 Barcelona Olympics, has delayed any decision, pending recommendations from Dubin.
Before last Thursday, Johnson still had the option - no matter how unlikely it would have sounded - to stand by his claim that he never ''knowingly'' took steroids and accuse Astaphan, Francis and others of deceiving him. Then, the truth would have been left for Dubin to interpret.
But Astaphan's tape of a purported conversation he had with Johnson, played before the inquiry, seemed to establish once and for all, that Johnson knew full well what he and those around him were doing.
If the tape is authentic - Johnson could contend it was fabricated -Dubin might have no choice but to judge him more harshly. If he does, Astaphan will have succeeded in damaging Johnson far beyond the point he now denies.
 Graphic



 
Photo of Dr. George (Jamie) Astaphan (Reuters)

 

End of Document


FDA Investigating Drug Manufacturer Alleged to Have Falsified Tests
The Associated Press
June 30, 1989, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 804 words
Byline: By DEBORAH MESCE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Food and Drug Administration said today it is investigating a New York drug manufacturer that a House subcommittee alleges falsified tests to win approval for its generic version of a drug used to treat high blood pressure.
The House Energy and Commerce investigations subcommittee alleges that a generic version of Dyazide made by Vitarine Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Springfield Gardens, N.Y., was sold to the public for more than a year without undergoing full safety tests.
Vitarine recalled the drug earlier this month because of concerns that faulty data may have been submitted to the FDA in an application for approval of the drug.
The subcommittee, in a letter to Vitarine on Thursday, said it had learned the company told FDA officials that instead of using the Vitarine generic for comparison tests with the originally forumulated Dyazide, the company substituted Dyazide for its product.
The result, the subcommittee said, was that a sample of Dyazide was tested against another sample of Dyazide, and the Vitarine sample was never measured against the original to see if it is absorbed into the body at the same rate and to the same extent as Dyazide.
"The new information raises serious concerns" about the safety of Vitarine's product, said Rep. John Dingell, D-Mich., in a letter to the FDA. He is chairman of the investigations subcommittee of the House Energy and Commerce Committee.
"The drug (the Vitarine generic) is not what was tested, so you don't have any idea whether it is safe," said a subcommittee source, who spoke on condition of anonymity.
"The FDA is in the middle of an ongoing investigation of Vitarine and it would be improper to comment any further at this time," said spokesman Jeff Nesbit. Asked whether the FDA had safety concerns about Dyazide or either of its generic versions, he said, "no," but added, "I really can't speak to that."
Asked about Dingell's allegations, Alan Kaplan, a Washington attorney representing Vitarine, said: "This is a matter that is being investigated and Vitarine has advised the FDA of this possibility. It's still under investigation. There's no definite conclusion at this time."
He said the investigation "involves certain products in which certain people have been working," and at least three Vitarine employees have been suspended.
Dyazide, made by SmithKline Beckman Corp., is one of the most widely prescribed drugs in the country. Before its first generic competition appeared in 1987, sales were more than $$300 million annually. However, after the first generic competition, made by Bolar Pharmaceutical, came on the market, SmithKline's Dyazide sales dropped 45 percent to $$200 million in 1988, said SmithKline spokesman Jeremy Heymsfeld.
Vitarine's generic version won FDA approval in February 1988.
The subcommittee said the allegations against Vitarine also raise questions about Bolar's generic version and SmithKline's original.
A subcommittee source said the tests showed that the two samples were not identicial even though SmithKline's original product allegedly was being compared with itself, instead of with the Vitarine generic drug.
Gene Pfeifer, an attorney for Bolar and a former FDA lawyer, said such differences are not unusual because of the nature of the tests. He said Bolar is confident that its product is safe.
Jeremy Heymsfeld, a SmithKline spokesman, also expressed his company's confidence in the safety and effectiveness of its product, which he said "has been demonstrated in millions of patients for more than 20 years."
The subcommittee asked Pharmakinetics of Baltimore, Md., the laboratory that conducted the tests comparing Vitarine's product and Bolar's version with the SmithKline original, to hold all samples of the drugs.
Mark Perkal, executive vice president of Pharmakinetics, said the company was cooperating with the agency. He said there was no way the lab would have known whether a company submitted false test samples. "We're not in the business to detect fraud," he said.
The comparison studies are one of two major tests key to the FDA's approval of a generic, lower-cost version of a prescription drug. The bioequivalence tests, which are the ones at issue in the Vitarine case, examine the rate and extent of absorption of the drug to determine whether it works with the same effectiveness as the original. To be approved as a generic version, a drug must also undergo a chemical review of its active ingredients.
Dingell's subcommittee has been conducting an investigation into alleged bribery in the FDA's generic drug division. The Justice Department also is investigating the allegations.
An FDA source, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said the agency doubts Vitarine's product is unsafe because it had undergone a chemical review and it had no reports of any problems with anyone who used the drug.

 

End of Document


U.S. ACTION ON FOODS, DRUGS DIPS
The New York Times
October 24, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

 Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
Section: Section C; Page 14, Column 6; Living Desk
Length: 452 words
Byline: UPI
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Oct. 23
Body




Food and Drug Administration prosecutions and recalls rose in 1984, but enforcement actions have dropped 50 percent and recalls have also declined during the Reagan Administration's term in office, according to figures made public by the Public Citizen Health Research Group.
The group, founded by Ralph Nader, the consumer activist, said the figures showed that the Administration was weak on enforcement of the food and drug laws. An F.D.A. spokesman suggested that the number of actions might have reflected more observance of the laws.
Public Citizen Health Research Group reports that Food and Drug Administration prosecutions and recalls rose in 1984, but enforcement actions have dropped 50 percent and recalls have also declined during Reagan Administration's term in office; says Administration was weak on enforcement of food and drug laws (S)
The agency's figures for the 1984 fiscal year, which ended Oct. 1, indicate that it had done the following:
* Sent 23 cases to the Justice Department for criminal prosecution, the highest number since 1977, when the figure was 32, but only one more than in 1983. Criminal cases include prosecution for adulterated products or filthy factories.
* Sent on 23 injunction cases, as against 28 in 1983.
* Sent on 213 seizure cases, compared with 255 in 1983.
* Recorded 1,408 product recalls, a dramatic increase from 1983, when 915 were recorded. The F.D.A. cannot require recalls but can put pressure on manufacturers to make them.
Agency enforcement actions - criminal cases, seizures and injunctions - totaled 1,114 for the fiscal years the Administration has been in office, which include the Carter Administration's last three and a half months. That compares with 2,231 during the fiscal years 1977 to 1980, under the Carter Administration and the last of the Ford Administration.
Food and drug agency officials say that under the Reagan Administration's drive for regulatory relief the emphasis is on recalls rather than on cumbersome Government seizures. Since President Reagan took office, however, recalls have also declined: the four-year total is 3,690, according to F.D.A. figures; under the Carter Administration it was 4,158.
Faye Peterson, an F.D.A. spokesman, said: ''The numbers game does not tell us much. The cop who hands out the most tickets: does that mean there is more crime or that the guy is just busier doing it?'' The emphasis, she went on, has been on ''a voluntary corrective action program, but it hasn't replaced the need for strict enforcement.''
She said that the agency had not sought the reason for the decline in the number of enforcement actions but that it might be because F.D.A. officials were doing a good job educating manufacturers.

 

End of Document


F.D.A. TELLS COMPANY TO REVISE DRUG DESCRIPTION
The New York Times
April 13, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

 Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1, Page 31, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 542 words
Byline: By IRVIN MOLOTSKY, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 12
Body




The Food and Drug Administration has taken the unusual step of telling a drug manufacturer to recall a press release it had issued on the safety and effectiveness of one of its medicines.
The Federal agency accused ICN Pharmaceuticals of Costa Mesa, Calif., of issuing a press kit that included false or misleading statements about its drug Virazole. The drug had been approved by the agency for the treatment of respiratory syncytial virus infection, but the F.D.A. said that the press release exaggerated both the severity of the illness it was designed to treat and the effectiveness of the drug in treating other illnesses.
A spokesman for the agency said the action, initiated in a letter March 24, appeared to be only the second time that it had moved in such a way against a drug maker. The previous incident, he said, involved a press release promoting the drug Oraflex that was distributed by Eli Lilly & Company.
 
'Gross Exaggeration' Charged
The Federal agency cited the following statement in the press release as false or misleading: ''Virazole holds a great potential because of its broad-spectrum antiviral action. The drug's usefulness in combating respiratory syncytial virus, influenza, measles, chicken pox, herpes simplex and herpes zoster, hepatitis A, Lassa fever and sandfly fever has been demonstrated in worldwide clinical research.''
In a letter to the chairman of ICN, Milan Panic, the agency said, ''The press kit grossly exaggerates the efficacy of Virazole beyond the single, limited indication provided in the approved labeling in that there are numerous representations and suggestions of efficacy in a wide variety of viral infections.''
The F.D.A. spokesman, William Grigg, said the agency could take the action because press releases were regarded as an extension of drug labeling, over which it has authority.
Other Government agencies, like the Security and Exchange Commission, have acted against press releases issued by corporations.
An official of the American Civil Liberties Union said he did not know enough about the case to comment on whether the action constituted a First Amendment free-speech issue.
 
No Comment From Company
Officers of ICN would not comment on the case. Owen Daley, a senior vice president of Hill & Knowlton, the public relations company that distributed the press material, said, ''They are prepared to demonstrate to the F.D.A. that they did not misrepresent deliberately approval of this product for the purposes for which it was not intended.''
As to his own concern's role, Mr. Daley said: ''Hill & Knowlton did not prepare the press release. We were assured by ICN that the substance was correct.''
In its letter to Mr. Panic, the Food and Drug Administration said, ''Generally, we believe that the press kit and related materials have resulted in the communication of false and/or misleading concepts concerning the safety and efficacy of Virazole.''
In addition, the F.D.A. charged that the press kit ''misrepresents the safety profile of Virazole, as currently known.''
The F.D.A. told ICN that it must provide a list of all recipients of its press release and send them a new, corrected description. Failing that, the agency said ICN faced seizure of the drug on the ground of mislabeling.

 

End of Document


New FDA rules may plug deadly loophole
The San Diego Union-Tribune
March 22, 1985 Friday

 Copyright 1985 The San Diego Union-Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. A-12
Length: 417 words
Byline: From News Service
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




WASHINGTON -- The Food and Drug Administration, citing a loophole that may have cost the lives of 30 infants, yesterday proposed regulations that would require drug companies to report all deaths or injuries linked to prescription drugs. The proposed new rules would require manufacturers to report immediately -- in no case taking more than 15 working days -- any serious, unexpected or adverse reaction to a drug or any significant increase in serious reactions. FDA rules now cover more than 90 percent of prescription sales, but products developed before 1938 -- the year Congress passed the law requiring that new drugs be approved by the FDA -- are still exempt from those requirements. Some common products approved before 1938 include morphine, codeine, epinephrine for heart stimulation, and vitamin products used in medical treatment. Health and Human Services Secretary Margaret Heckler, in a statement, called the proposal "an important step in protecting the public health because it will complete FDA's early warning system for drugs." FDA Commissioner Frank E. Young said the regulations were prompted by incidents in late 1983 and early 1984, when some 1,000 premature infants were given a new intravenous form of vitamin E products that had long been on the market and were exempt from the reporting requirements. High dosages of the substance, E-Ferol, were prescribed in an effort to prevent an eye condition often associated with prematurity.
However E-Ferol is now suspected of causing the deaths of about 30 of the infants. The tragedy was compounded because there was no requirement to report the deaths to the FDA, Young said. As a result, he said, the agency did not know of the problem until two hospitals asked the national Centers for Disease Control to investigate the recent abnormalities and deaths among premature infants. When the CDC alerted the FDA, the drug agency launched a recall.
But, Young said, the FDA might have learned of the problem sooner if E-Ferol had been subject to the reaction-reporting requirement. "The new rules eliminate a reporting loophole that was recognized following the E-Ferol tragedy," Young said.
"By broadening the reporting requirements to cover all prescription drugs, today's proposed regulations should eliminate such tragic health consequences." Dr. Sidney Wolfe, director of the Ralph Nader-founded Public Citizen Health Research Group, said he welcomed the new rules, but said they will not be enough unless the government gets tougher.
 Load-Date: August 10, 2007

 

End of Document


EPA Cites Drinking Water as Possible Source of Household Radon
The Associated Press
September 22, 1988, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1988 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 589 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




An Environmental Protection Agency official says radon gas evaporating out of drinking water could be "as large a contaminant as anything we're dealing with."
The agency has already said radon could be responsible for as any as 20,000 deaths from lung cancer each year and Mike Cook, head of the EPA's Office of Drinking Water, said a few hundred of those may be caused by water-source radon.
Radon, a radioactive gas that can be concentrated in houses, generally arises from the soil beneath a home, working its way through foundation cracks or other entrances.
Cook, in an interview on a discussion on the "USA Today Television Show," quoted results of a survey of wells across the country that said 72 percent had "dangerously high" radon levels.
 
 ---
 
 Court Won't Block Sales of Foreclosed Federal Property
WASHINGTON (AP) - Advocates for the homeless who had sought to force the government to consider using foreclosed single-family homes to help low-income people have lost a round in federal court.
U.S. District Judge Oliver Gasch refused Wednesday to issue a preliminary injunction to bar the Department of Housing and Urban Development from selling to the higest bidder homes it had acquired through mortgage foreclosures.
HUD general counsel J. Michael Dorsey, commenting on the decision, said the department planned to put its inventory of 47,000 foreclosed houses on sale today through its field offices.
 
 ---
 
 Armed Services Numbers Grow in August Despite Reduction Goal
WASHINGTON (AP) - The number of men and women in uniform increased in August but still remained well below the levels of last year.
As of Aug. 31, the Army, Navy, Air Force and Marine Corps had 2,122,874 men and women on active duty, the Pentagon reported Wednesday.
The total was up 11,742 compared from the 2,111,132 reported July 31 but down 43,940 compared to the level at the end of August 1987.
Although Defense Secretary Frank C. Carlucci has ordered a cut of almost 36,000 positions from active-duty rosters by the end of the 1987 fiscal year, the Army and Navy reported increases in the numbers of men and women on active duty in August.
 
 ---
 
 Drug Firm Recalls 50 Million Epilepsy Tablets
WASHINGTON (AP) - The government says a Colorado drug company is recalling 50 million carbamazepine tablets for epilepsy treatment because they do not dissolve properly and thus may not be as effective as intended.
The tablets are not harmful, but may not control or prevent seizures as well as they should, the Food and Drug Administration said Wednesday.
Patients will not be able to identify the recalled tablets themselves and should check with their pharmacies, the FDA said.
The 200-milligram tablets are round, white and marked on one side with one of three designations: 35/15, C66 or 832/G133.
Pharmacies can check with information supplied to them by the manufacturer, Pharmaceutical Basics Inc., of Denver, to determine whether particular tablets are among the recalled lots.
 
 ---
 
 First Day Stamp Programs to be Sold
WASHINGTON (AP) - The U.S. Postal Service will begin publicly selling First Day programs, one of the most prized and hardest to get stamp collector souvenirs.
The programs have traditionally been given out for free, but only to people attending the special ceremonies held on the first day of issue for new stamps.
They contain one of the stamps, cancelled on that date, as well as a program for the ceremony listing the participants and describing the subject of the stamp.
The Postal Service said Wednesday the sales will begin in January.

 

End of Document


ANTI-DEPRESSANT RECALLED
COURIER-MAIL
January 24, 1986 Friday

 Copyright 1986 Nationwide News Pty Limited
Length: 198 words
Byline: HAMMOND P
Body




Anti-depressant recalled MERITAL, an anti-depressant drug, has been recalled because of an outbreak of potentially fatal reactions. Hoechst Australia yesterday told the Federal Government of the recall of its Merital capsules and tablets.
QNPA company spokesman said the drug had been successfully used in anti-depressant therapy over the past decade. It had been available in Australia since 1981. The Federal Health Minister, Dr Blewett, said a worldwide recall of the drug had been ordered after an increase in cases of severe reaction in Europe in the past week. The reactions reported by Hoechst included several cases of haemolytic anaemia, which Dr Blewett described as ""particularly serious and sometimes fatal". Dr Blewett said stocks of the drug would be recalled, doctors should stop prescribing and pharmacists handed prescriptions for Merital should contact the prescribing doctor. He said users should contact their doctors as soon as possible about further treatment but in the meantime should not stop taking the drug. The Queensland Pharmaceutical Society president, Col. David Lloyd, said the drug was a specialised one which was not widely used in the general community.
 Load-Date: September 18, 2003

 

End of Document


Fake Birth Controls Traced from Spain, Guatemala
The Associated Press
February 18, 1987, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1987 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 612 words
Byline: By CATHERINE WILSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MIAMI
Body




Six people have been indicted in what authorities said was a plot to distribute a million fake birth control pills smuggled into the United States from Spain and Guatemala.
The plot prompted a 1984 nationwide recall of birth control pills, officials said.
The six, named in a federal indictment unsealed Tuesday, were charged with manufacturing, importing and distributing the pills.
No pregnancies or illnesses were reported after the fradulent Ovulen-21 packages were distributed, according to G.D. Searle and Co., which manufactures birth control pills under that label.
"There have not been any problems that we can ascribe to it,"said Searle spokeswoman Kay Bruno.
The counterfeit pills were smuggled into the United States from 1981 until October 1984, when the first suspect pills were reported at pharmacies in Kansas and Wisconsin, the indictment charged.
"The pills were pretty poor quality," said Ana Barnett, spokeswoman for the U.S. attorney's office here. "They come in these blister packages, and they were powdering."The U.S. Food and Drug Administration supervised a recall of two suspect lots, and all the counterfeit pills were removed from pharmacy shelves by January 1985.
"We felt like we were victimized in somewhat the same way as the women who take the drugs," Ms. Bruno said. "Why us? There's never been any explanation for that one."Investigators allege that counterfeit pills of ubndetermined effectiveness were manufactured in Barcelona, and that a batch with a faulty chemical formula was produced in Guatemala City.
Fermin Alfonso, 49, of Fort Lauderdale, president of Lantor Corp., and Beatriz Villalon, 42, of Miami, president of Vibe Export Corp., have been arrested.
Both were indicted on counterfeit drug and wire fraud charges, conspiracy to import and distribute the Spanish pills, and conspiracy to manufacture, import and distribute the Guatemalan pills.
Edward John Peterson, 59, of Miami and Sheldon Harwin of Hollywood, were charged with conspiracy in connection with the Spanish pills, and counterfeit drug and wire fraud charges.
Jacques Behar of Miami, president and owner of Alrro Corp., and Gilberto Yurubi of Miami, Alfonso's cousin, were charged with conspiracy in the Spanish pill case and distributing counterfeit pills.
A shipment of 10,000 counterfeit packages was sent from Barcelona to Mexico via Texas in December 1981, according to a sketchy account provided in the indictments. Another shipment of 10,000 packages was sent to Miami later that month.
Peterson transferred 10,000 packages to Harwin, who sold 9,930 packages in July 1982 to Gulf Coast Drug Supply Inc. in Miami, according to the indictment. In January 1983, Harwin negotiated the sale of 30,000 other packages to Gulf Coast, the indictment said.
A total of 25,530 packages was delivered to Interstate Drug Exchange of Long Island, N.Y., in November 1983. One shipment of Guatemalan pills was sent to Interstate Cigar Corp. of Long Island, the indictment said..
Alfonso and Ms. Villalon allegedly contracted with Laboratorios Letona S.A. in Guatemala City to manufacture pills that would be similar in appearance to Ovulen-21, and Ms. Villalon later changed the chemical formula, Ms. Barnett said.
Alfonso and Ms. Villalon each could face 74 years in prison and fines of $442,000 if convicted; Peterson, 36 years and a $35,000 fine; Behar and Yurubi, 17 years and $60,000 fines; and Harwin, 14 years and a $40,000 fine.
None of the companies named in the indictment was listed in the Miami telephone directory. Alfonso and Harwin have unlisted telephone numbers, and Ms. Villalon's number has been disconnected. There was no answer Tuesday night at a listing for Behar.

 

End of Document


Aspirin linked to rare childhood disease
United Press International
October 2, 1985, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1985 U.P.I.
Section: Domestic News
Length: 408 words
Byline: By KARIN DAVIES
Dateline: BOSTON
Body




Reasearchers released data Wednesday showing a link between Reye's syndrome, a rare disease that affects children, and the use of aspirin during the flu or chickenpox.
The Aspirin Foundation of America immediately charged ''a total mismanagement of data and information.''
A pilot study by the Public Health Service Reye's Syndrome Task Force concluded that if a child develops the disease there is a 93 percent chance that he received salicylates, an aspirin ingredient, during a previous illness.
Children who take aspirin are 16 times more likely to get Reye's than those who do not, said Dr. Michael Barrett, co-author of the study and physician at the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta.
But, Dr. Joseph White, president of the Aspirin Foundation, said neither this study spearheaded by Dr. Eugene Hurwitz of the CDC nor any other to date has proved that aspirin causes Reye's.
''There is no proof that has been shown to us,'' he said.
Nonetheless, the industry has voluntarily agreed to place labels on aspirin urging that physicians be consulted before aspirin is used to treat children who have flu or chickenpox symptoms, White said.
Reye's develops in 1 of 100,000 youngsters under age 18 each year. Since a high of 550 reported cases in 1980, reports of the disease have declined. This year, the CDC expects to hear of 200 cases, Barrett said.
''The disease seems to be decreasing. I'd like to think it's because of a decrease in aspirin use,'' he said.
Reye's syndrome typically occurs four to seven days after a child has the flu or chicken pox. Rather than recovering, the child begins to vomit and becomes delirious. In severe cases, the child lapses into a coma and 10 percent die.
Between February and May 1984, a research team conducted the pilot study to examine the methods for a larger study of a previously reported relation between Reye's syndrome and medications.
Thirty patients with Reye's syndrome, whose diagnoses were confirmed by an expert panel, and 145 controls were matched for age, race and antecedent illness, a report in the New England Journal of Medicine said.
The children's caretakers were interviewed concerning the drugs the youngsters received while ill.
More Reye's victims than controls had received salicylates during the illness that preceeded Reye's, the study said.
White said studies based on interview are inherently faulty, and the caretakers may not have accurately recalled which drugs they administered.

 

End of Document


FDA Accused Of Botching Probes Of Drug-Diversion Schemes
The Associated Press
July 15, 1986, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1986 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 599 words
Byline: By JAMES ROWLEY, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A House panel accused the Food and Drug Administration on Tuesday of bungling investigations of schemes to divert prescription drugs to a shadowy market that is a source of misbranded, adulterated and counterfeit medicines.
Members of the House Energy and Commerce investigations subcommittee asked FDA officials to explain why the agency refused entry of $600,000 worth of imported drugs in Miami that were later allowed into the country by federal officials in Boston.
Martin E. Katz, an FDA compliance officer in Orlando, Fla., said he refused to admit the shipment of drugs as "American Goods Returned" because there was insufficient documentation that the medicines were made by a U.S. company.
But Katz conceded the company seeking to import the drugs requested that FDA refuse entry to prevent seizure by Florida officials.
Katz also admitted under questioning by the panel's chairman, Rep. John Dingell, D-Mich., that the importer had indicated he would try to ship the drugs through Boston.
"They requested refusal so we refused it," Katz said.
"I think you gentlemen have a problem," Dingell told the FDA officials. "You allowed them to be re-exported at the request of the importer.""I think we were following the instructions sent down by headquarters," said Edward R. Atkins, the FDA compliance director in Orlando. Those instructions mandate that drugs cannot be imported if there is improper documentation of their origin, he said.
"Were you thinking when you followed the instructions or were you just reading in a book?" Dingell said.
Dr. Frank E. Young, the FDA commmissioner, admitted that "There was not as complete a cooperation with the state of Florida as I would have hoped.""In fact there was no cooperation," Dingell said.
"It would have been better to allow the seizure in the state of Florida and that was a failure," Young said.
Dingell is pushing legislation that would prohibit the reimportation of American drugs, except by the manufacturer, as an attempt to dry up the shadowy market in diverted medicines. The measure would also prohibit drug company salesmen from giving free samples directly to doctors.
Dingell and subcommittee aides also questioned FDA officials about their investigation into the diversion of 58,500 vials of an antibiotic powder that is injected into patients during surgery.
FDA began an investigation at the behest of Lederle Laboratories, which complained after determining that counterfeit labels were placed on the vials.
The drugs were ordered for shipment to Honduras but Spanish labels were replaced with counterfeit English labels after the drug was diverted for sale in the United States.
The company has contended in a civil suit that two of its employees in Honduras were bribed by a Miami importer to order the drugs, which were then diverted to other points.
Panel members contended that FDA officials did not vigorously support Lederle's attempt last winter to get a court injunction to stop further distribution of the diverted drug.
"We could have been more vigorous in support of that," Young conceded.
Young said the FDA tested six vials and determined the contents had not lost its potency or had been adulterated. Based on this sampling, FDA determined that some 41,000 vials that had already made their way into the U.S. market were probably safe, he said.
"Most of the drug had already been distributed" before FDA learned about the mislabeling, he said. The FDA later seized 17,000 vials of the drug.
A broad recall was not ordered because FDA scientists determined from the sampling that the drug had not lost its potency, Young said.

 

End of Document


Kraft Taking Apart Plant in Search for Bacteria
The Associated Press
July 8, 1986, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1986 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 489 words
Byline: By JANE GOLDENBERG, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: GLENVIEW, Ill.
Body




An elderly Florida woman who said she contracted a flu-like illness after eating Polar B'ar ice cream bars is the first confirmed case of illness linked to a Kraft Inc. plant in Virginia, officials say.
More than 170 people in eight states have reported flu-like symptoms after eating the ice cream bars, but until the disclosure Monday of the Jacksonville, Fla., case, none had tested positive for listeriosis, authorities said.
Officials of the suburban Chicago-based company on Monday began dismantling the Richmond, Va., plant seeking the source of the Listeria monocytogenes bacteria that has been found in bars produced there.
Frances Weldon, in her 70s, said she ate ice cream bars from the contaminated batch, said Walt Lamies, environmental health supervisor for the northeastern Florida city. Listeriosis can be life-threatening, but the woman's physician, Dr. Jay Edelberg, said he had prescribed antibiotics and he expected her to feel better within 72 hours.
Kraft officials said they hope to reopen the plant in 30 to 60 days. "We're going to keep at it until we find the source," said spokesman Paul Johnson.
Johnson said there had not been any conclusive evidence that the people reporting flu-like symptoms after eating Polar B'ars actually had ingested the bacteria.
People reported symptoms in Kentucky, Pennsylvania, Alabama, South Carolina, North Carolina, Virinia and Georgia. In Florida, Lamie said two women in addition to Ms. Weldon had reported symptoms, but it had not been confirmed whether they had listeriosis.
The plant was closed Thursday after the Listeria bacteria were found in Checkerberry flavor Polar B'ars, which had left the factory nearly a month earlier. That day, Kraft _ working with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration _ recalled all Polar B'ars that had been made at the plant, as a precaution.
Polar B'ars made at Kraft plants in Framingham, Mass., and Huntington, Ind., are not affected by the recall.
Kraft officials said the recalled bars, coded 51-6426, were distributed east of the Mississippi River, to 15,000 to 18,000 stores.
In Illinois, Dr. Bernard J. Turnock, director of the state Department of Public Health, urged consumers, as a precaution, to destroy all Polar B'ars and return the wrappers to stores for refunds.
"This advisory applies to all Polar B'ars regardless of flavor or lot number," he said.
Johnson said consumers are encouraged to return any Polar B'ars they fear might be contaminated for a refund.
There is generally a five- to 12-day incubation period, so if people report feeling ill the day after eating one of the suspected ice cream bars, "we can conclusively say they are not tied together," he said.
Listeriosis can be dangerous to pregnant women and their fetuses, as well as to small children, frail elderly people or others with weakened immune systems. In healthy adults, it may cause short-lived, flu-like symptoms, depending on the amount of bacteria present.

 

End of Document


Vitamin Solution Linked to Infant Deaths
Facts on File World News Digest
June 22, 1984

 Copyright 1984 Facts on File, Inc.
Section: U.S. AFFAIRS; Medicine & Health
Length: 706 words
Body




At a May 4 congressional hearing, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration conceded it had erred in failing to stop sales of an unapproved vitamin E solution linked to as many as 38 infant deaths.
The product, E-Ferol Aqueous Solution, had been recalled April 9 by its distributor, O'Neal, Jones & Feldman Inc., of St. Louis, after the vitamin solution was linked to the deaths of 12 premature babies. E-Ferol was manufactured by Carter-Glogau Laboratories, a Glendale, Ariz. unit of Revco D. S. Inc. of Twinsburg, Ohio.
Vitamin E had long been used in oral form to prevent blindness in premature babies born with vitamin deficiencies. E-Ferol, put on the market in December 1983, was the first commercially available form of vitamin E that could be injected intravenously. Use of the intravenous form avoided bowel problems associated with the oral form.
After the drug was recalled, the FDA April 18 announced an investigation of the drugs distribution, charging that E-Ferol should have been submitted to the FDA for approval before marketing. O'Neal, Jones officials maintained that they did not need FDA approval to market E-Ferol.
An FDA spokesman said May 1 that the vitamin had been traced to 159 hospitals. Of those, 62 were reported not to have used the preparation, while another 62 hospitals had used it without incident. Thirty-five hospitals reported 81 cases of serious adverse effects, including as many as 38 deaths.
FDA Role Questioned -- The FDA acknowledged April 30 that it had received inquiries as early as November 1983 about whether the FDA had approvedE-Ferol, but said the agency had decided to allow the drug to continue on the market while it reviewed the safety and efficacy of a broad class of similar drugs. The FDA did not act to recall the product until it received reports from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control of infant deaths associated with E-Ferol.
The FDA had been reviewing intramuscular and intravenous vitamin preparations that had been on the market since before 1962, when Federal law first required that drugs be shown safe and effective before they could be sold. An April 30 FDA statement said "the FDA does not normally initiate regulatory action against a specific product until completion of the class review dictates appropriate action for the entire class."
Rep. Ted Weiss (D, N.Y.), chairman of the House Government Operations subcommittee on intergovernmental relations and human resources, April 30 launched an investigation of E-Ferol and the FDA. Noting that E-Ferol was a new drug, Weiss said, "The law requires that all new drugs be approved by FDA as safe and effective before they are marketed. FDA must share responsibility for this tragedy in not removing this...drug from the marketplace last year."
Weiss chaired a May 4 subcommittee hearing on the FDA and E-Ferol. At the hearing, Dr. Harry Meyer, director of the FDA's Center for Drugs and Biologics, said of the FDA decision to give a low priority to investigating sales of E-Ferol, "What we realize with the benefit of hindsight is that was a wrong decision." Dr. Mark Novitch, acting FDA commissioner, added, "This product should have had more scrutiny than it got.
Distributor Faulted -- Testimony May 4 also revealed that E-Ferol's distributor had failed to report problems associated with the drug.
Dr. Carl Bodenstein, a physician at Sacred Heart Hospital in Spokane, Wash., testified that he had warned O'Neal, Jones & Feldman in January that the drug was thought to have contributed to the deaths of at least three infants in Spokane. Bodenstein testified that he had told an executive of the firm, "I felt he had a big problem" and that the executive had responded by defending E-Ferol as safe and effective. Bodenstein said he would not have used E-Ferol had he known that clinical trials had not been done on it.
Dr. Curtis McCammon, director of the University of Tennessee Memorial Research Center, said he had called the firm in March after three infants had died at his facility. McCammon said he was told there had been no other reports of death or adverse reactions.
After hearing the testimony, Weiss said his subcommittee would refer the matter to the Justice Department for possible civil or criminal prosecution.

 

End of Document


DRUG WITHDRAWN AFTER FIVE DEATHS
The New York Times
March 5, 1983, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

 Copyright 1983 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 9, Column 6; National Desk
Length: 407 words
Byline: By MICHAEL deCOURCY HINDS, Special to the New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, March 4
Body




The Food and Drug Administration said today that it was considering new labeling requirements for Zomax, a prescription painkiller that has been associated with five allergyrelated deaths. The manufacturer has withdrawn the drug from sale pending the new labels.
''We have been discussing label changes with the company for a couple of weeks,'' said William Grigg, an F.D.A. spokesman, adding: ''The company decided to withdraw the drug while the new labeling is worked out. This is a company that bends over backwards for safety.''
WASHINGTON, March 4 - The Food and Drug Administration said today that it was considering new labeling requirements for Zomax, a prescription painkiller that has been associated with five allergyrelated deaths.
The agency is not concerned with the drug itself, Mr. Grigg said, only that information given physicians may not have adequately warned them of rare, but severe, allergic reactions.
Since the drug was approved for sale two years ago, the McNeil Pharmaceutical Company of Sterling House, Pa., a Johnson & Johnson subsidiary, has sold 15 million prescriptions. The F.D.A. is concerned that it may be overused.
Robert Andrews, a spokesman, said Johnson & Johnson's decision to withdraw the drug was based on an ''apparent increase in the number of allergic reactions'' in the last month. Johnson & Johnson is asking consumers to return Zomax to drugstores for a refund.
In two years, the company has had reports of 1,100 reactions and five deaths. ''We think the nonfatal reaction of one in 15,000 is rare,'' Mr. Grigg of the F.D.A said, ''and less common than allergic reactions to penicillin.'' Two of the people who died are known to have been allergic to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, the class to which Zomax belongs.
Johnson & Johnson stock fell this morning after the disclosure of the deaths, and trading was halted briefly on the New York Stock Exchange. It closed at 48, off 2 1/4.
The Zomax problem comes five months after Tylenol capsules, a Johnson & Johnson over-the-counter drug, was recalled after seven people died from poisoned capsules.
''The Tylenol problem involved an outside agent,'' said David Saks, an analyst at the A.G. Becker brokerage, in arguing that the Zomax problem was potentially more damaging for Johnson & Johnson than the Tylenol scare.
''It was not Johnson & Johnson's fault,'' Mr. Saks said of the Tylenol incident. ''But, there is something apparently wrong here.''

 

End of Document


Antibiotics are recalled
Herald
October 26, 1987 Monday

 Copyright 1987 Nationwide News Pty Limited
Length: 101 words
Body




A South Australian drug company has recalled a batch of antibiotics after reports that some packets contained the wrong capsules.
Faulding Pharmaceuticals of Salisbury North today placed recall notices for Eryc Erythromycin capsules in national newspapers.
 The ads said the company had received three reports that some cartons of Eryc capsules contained a different antibiotic drug called Doryx.
 The company has recalled all cartons of the drug, batch number 7163046, released since October 2.
 Anyone prescribed the drug should check with a pharmacist or doctor, the ad said.
 END OF STORY
 Load-Date: September 19, 2003

 

End of Document


SmithKline to buy up to 20 percent of its shares in ''Dutch Auction''
United Press International
November 26, 1986, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1986 U.P.I.
Section: Financial
Length: 521 words
Byline: By MICHAEL DABNEY
Dateline: PHILADELPHIA
Body




SmithKline Beckman Corp. Wednesday invited its shareholders to sell back up to 20 percent of the pharmaceutical company's stock in a ''Dutch Auction.''
The company offered to purchase between 5 million and 15 million of its 76 million outstanding shares, said SmithKline spokesman Jeremy Heymsfeld. Shareholders electing to tender their stock must do so by designating a price between $86 and $96 a share.
''Upon reviewing the tenders, the company will select a price from this range and purchase the shares tendered at or below that price,'' he said.
Heymsfeld said the new offer was a ''continuation of a (share purchasing) program dating back to January 1984, although the dollars are larger.''
''We hope to complete the purchase program this year so that shareholders wishing to tender may take advantage of the favorable tax treatment of capital gains in effect through 1986,'' SmithKline President and Chief Executive Henry Wendt said in a release.
The program will conclude at midnight Dec. 26, Wendt said.
Drug industry analysts speculate that SmithKline, as well as other drug companies, was looking for things to do with its money.
''The problem, if you want to call it a problem, is what to do with cash flow,'' said Rita Freidman, a stock analyst at Provident National Bank in Philadelphia.
''All drug companies have been buying back shares. By having an auction like this, the speculation could help the price (of the stock) in the near term,'' she said.
SmithKline's stock advanced $4.50 a share to $91.25 in Wednesday's trading on the New York Stock Exchange. It has increased from $75.625 a share since the beginning of this year and has traded in a 52-week range of $52.375 to $105.375.
Heymsfeld said the company will not make recommendations to shareholders on whether to tender their shares. However, he said shareholders might sell for a number of reasons, including tax incentives.
Wendt said the program was an attractive investment for the company and its continuing shareholders.
Fewer shareholders could mean higher dividends for those remaining, said stock analyst Michael Martorelli of Janney Montgomery Scott, a Philadelphia brokage house.
''They (SmithKline) will be reducing equity and letting that money work to the benefit of the remaining shareholders,'' Martorelli said.
The company estimated that its sales for 1986 will top $3.7 billion, up 11 percent from $3.3 billion reported last year. SmithKline had net earnings of $514.4 million last year and estimated its 1986 earnings per share to be between $6.75 and $6.80, or as much as $523 million.
However, net earnings in 1986 will include a $56 million pre-tax cost for the recall and reintroduction of Contac and one other over-the-counter drug, Heymsfeld said.
SmithKline recalled capsules of Contac, Dietac and Teldrin from store shelves last March when an ingredient used in rat poison was discovered in capsules of the three medicines removed from stores in Houston and Orlando, Fla.
Contac, a cold medicine, and Teldrin, a hay fever medicine, were reintroduced last August. Dietac, which had suffered from small and declining sales, was not reintroduced.

 

End of Document


Drug feared tainted with AIDS virus; Suspect RhoGam used on 75 women at Scripps hospital
The San Diego Union-Tribune
September 24, 1987 Thursday

 Copyright 1987 The San Diego Union-Tribune
Section: NEWS; Pg. A-1
Length: 943 words
Byline: Rex Dalton, Staff Writer
Body




Seventy-five pregnant women treated at Scripps Memorial Hospital in La Jolla last year received the drug RhoGam from a manufactured lot under investigation for possible contamination with the AIDS virus, hospital officials said yesterday. The officials said they would notify the obstetricians who treated the patients today.
The officials said they would let the physicians, who prescribed the blood-derived drug, decide whether to contact the women and tell them about its potential contamination. RhoGam, a drug administered to the 15 percent of pregnant women whose blood is Rh negative to prevent blood disease in their infants, has not been linked to the transmission of the AIDS virus before. It is extremely unlikely the deadly disease could be transmitted through the drug, which was distributed by Scripps Memorial for several weeks beginning in July 1986, said hospital spokesman Michael Bardin. "Any woman who is concerned should consult with her physician," Bardin said. There has been no indication of any problem among patients receiving RhoGam from the questioned lot, he said. Officials at several other hospitals in San Diego County with large obstetric caseloads, contacted by The San Diego Union in an informal survey, said they had not received RhoGam from the questioned lot, identified by the manufacturer as RHG 636. Those included the Navy Hospital at Balboa Park, Sharp Memorial, UCSD Medical Center and Kaiser Foundation hospitals. Officials with the federal Food and Drug Administration and the manufacturer, Ortho Diagnostic Systems Inc. of New Jersey, both began investigating the questioned lot of RhoGam last week following a report that a military woman and child were infected with the virus from the batch. Neither the FDA nor Ortho have recalled the drugs in lot RHG 636, most of which already have been administered to patients at military and civilian hospitals around the nation. However, military officials in Washington, D.C., earlier this week ordered their facilities worldwide to suspend use of the lot of 12,500 doses, which was distributed nationally in July last year. Federal officials yesterday said the military case that prompted the probe involves an Army enlisted woman and her child.
The woman received the medication at a military hospital at Fort Polk, La. Military officials said they suspected the RhoGam may have contained the AIDS virus because they could identify no other method by which the woman could have been infected. Officials of Ortho Diagnostic, a division of Johnson & Johnson Co., said that AIDS could not be transmitted through RhoGam because the alcohol used in the processing would kill the AIDS virus.
Also, the pooled blood supplies used to make the drug have been screened for AIDS virus exposure since June 1985, said the company officials. Blood center authorities at major medical centers in San Diego supported this view, saying RhoGam and similar Rh-immune globulin products being administered pregnant women are safe. Information about the military case was obtained from spokesmen at the Defense Personnel Support Center in Philadelphia, which supplies military bases worldwide with medicine, and Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington, D.C., where the woman and child are being treated. According to Frank I. Johnson of the support center, the woman, then an active-duty sergeant, received the suspected dose of RhoGam in September last year at the hospital at Fort Polk, a large Army base in northern Louisiana.
The support center had supplied the hospital with the RhoGam. The woman has been married for eight years, denied any extramarital sexual relations, had not had any blood transfusions and denied using intravenous drugs, according to Johnson, who read from a military report on the case. He said the woman's husband has twice tested negative for exposure to the AIDS virus, which can be spread through body fluids such as semen, blood or blood products.
The couple have been married for about eight years. It is not known when tests first revealed that the woman and her child, who was born last December, had been exposed to the AIDS virus, officials said.
She was moved to Walter Reed last week for care. Dr. D. Craig Right, an infectious disease specialist who treats many of the Army's AIDS patients at Walter Reed, filed the report that led to the military's suspension of lot RHG 636. Right examined the woman at Walter Reed and could not determine any other mode of transmission, said Ben Smith, medical center spokesman. Both the woman and the child have tested positive for the antibody that indicates exposure to the AIDS virus, and those tests were duplicated by another type of test (Western blot) confirming the results, Johnson said. Typically, RhoGam is given in the seventh month of pregnancy, and to the mother within 72 hours after the birth of a child, doctors said. The woman also had received RhoGam in May and August of 1985 for a previous child, officials said, but the RhoGam lots for those doses were ruled out because that child was not infected with the virus. Officials said they suspected the dose she received during pregnancy because it was the only one that could have infected both the mother and child. Sufficient quantities of lot RHG 636 are available to test the drug for the AIDS virus, officials said.
However, they said those tests may be inconclusive because only a small quantity of the virus may have gotten into a portion of the lot, making it impossible to detect. Nationally, more than 42,000 individuals have contracted AIDS, with a small portion of them having contracted the disease from blood or blood products.
 Load-Date: August 10, 2007

 

End of Document


Colombian envoy shot as warning papers say
The Toronto Star
January 15, 1987, Thursday, FINAL EDITION

 Copyright 1987 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
Section: NEWS; Pg. A16
Length: 345 words
Byline: (REUTER)
Dateline: BOGOTA, Colombia
Body



BOGOTA (Reuter) - Drug traffickers shot Colombia's ambassador to Hungary to show they could take revenge anywhere in the world, diplomats and newspaper commentators say.
"What happened - in a Communist country - proves that drug traffickers have no limits in their challenge to the state. There are no moral or physical borders they will not violate," said an editorial yesterday in the daily newspaper El Espectador.
The paper's editor, anti-drug crusader Guillermo Cano, was murdered last month, apparently on orders of the drug mafia.
"Borders are no longer sufficient to stop criminals," said the daily El Tiempo.
Ambassador Enrique Parejo Gonzalez, 56, was shot twice in the head by a lone gunman Tuesday as he emerged from his Budapest residence. He underwent emergency surgery and is expected to survive.
Parejo Gonzalez, who had received numerous death threats from Colombia's cocaine czars during his two-year tenure as justice minister, was sent to Hungary last August because it was believed he would be safer there, political sources said.
Signed warrant
A group named after Colombian drug trafficker Hernan Botero Moreno, whose extradition warrant to the United States had been signed by Parejo Gonzalez when he was justice minister, claimed responsibility for the shooting.
Opposition parties joined Colombian President Virgilio Barco yesterday in calling for an all-out effort against the narcotics kings.
The drug bosses have murdered a government minister, a Supreme Court justice, 20 judges and two newspaper editors in two years.
Parejo Gonzalez' predecessor as justice minister, Rodrigo Lara Bonilla, was murdered in a Bogota street in April, 1984, apparently by drug traders.
Diplomats recalled that El Spectador editor Cano's assassination had illustrated that the drug barons were ready to eliminate whomever they considered an obstacle to their multi-billion dollar illegal trade.
"Now, they showed they can do it wherever they want to," said one European diplomat.
See related story by Leger on page A16
 Load-Date: May 13, 1999

 

End of Document


Manufacturers are edging quietly toward ads for prescription drugs
Christian Science Monitor (Boston, MA)
August 7, 1984, Tuesday

 COPYRIGHT 1984 THE CHRISTIAN SCIENCE PUBLISHING SOCIETY
Section: Ideas; Ads For Prescription Drugs?; Pg. 23
Length: 1267 words
Byline: By Hilary DeVries, Staff writer of The Christian Science Monitor
Dateline: Washington
Body




Last year Americans spent nearly $18 billion - the equivalent of more than $77 per person - on prescription drugs. And they did so without a single product having been advertised to consumers.
But now developments within the giant United States pharmaceutical industry, together with proposed federal legislation that would increase the number of generic prescription drugs reaching the market, indicate that drug companies may be closer than ever to marketing prescription drugs directly to consumers.
So competitive is the industry, and so potentially lucrative the market, that despite industry concern and a current one-year Food and Drug Administration (FDA) moratorium on direct marketing, most drugmakers are quietly but actively considering advertising, say observers from consumer groups and from within the industry.
As a result, mass merchandising of prescription drugs is becoming a hotly debated topic - one that is raising significant practical and ethical questions. According to some consumer groups, professional associations, and critics within and outside the industry, direct consumer advertising would lead to overprescribing - a practice critics say threatens the nation's health.
''Advertising of prescription drugs directly to the public is a Pandora's Box,'' says Neil Sweig, a pharmaceutical industry analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities. ''There is magnificent profit opportunity but also a tremendous potential for damage.''
According to analysts, the advent of such direct-to-consumer advertising would cause drugmakers to run risks, not only of lower profit margins, but of increased product liability suits. Last week the New Jersey Supreme Court ruled that drug manufacturers who fail to warn consumers of their products' harmful effects are directly liable for damages.
Proponents of the advertising, who at this point are keeping a very low profile, base their arguments on the idea that consumers need more ''information'' about the proliferating number of drugs available. But consumer critics charge that greater profit is the real motivation.
The controversy and the FDA moratorium were initially sparked one year ago by the first-ever televised promotion of prescription drugs - on a Florida cable-television program aimed at physicians, not consumers. Since then, however, drug manufacturers have consistently but unobtrusively pursued the idea. Although publicly divided on the issue, companies have privately conducted test-marketing studies while openly boosting public-awareness campaigns on television and in print which focus on prevention rather than treatment. At least one drugmaker, Ciba-Geigy Corporation, is now awaiting a lifting of the FDA moratorium to launch a pilot consumer campaign.
Such moves have fostered debate, not only within the drug industry and among consumer groups but increasingly in the advertising and broadcast industries and congressional circles as well. The FDA moratorium effectively prohibits direct-to-consumer marketing (except for price-comparative ads) while the agency is formulating its new rules to govern such advertising. CBS Inc. has just completed the first network-sponsored marketing study of consumer reaction to possible TV and print advertisements of prescription drugs. A House Commerce subcommittee has polled dozens of drugmakers and may hold hearings later this summer.
Until recently, US drug manufacturers supplied publicity about their prescription products only to physicians and other medical professionals. But now, analysts say, a rapidly changing marketplace is forcing some makers to stimulate patient demand more aggressively. Observers point to several factors contributing to an increasingly competitive industry: a declining US world market share (due largely to stringent FDA requirements that indirectly boost US drugmakers' costs), a lull in the number of new drugs coming to market, and the growing generic-drug industry.  The latter is a development that some analysts predict will restructure the entire pharmaceutical industry. A bill is in the House, sponsored by Henry A. Waxman (D) of California, which could double the number of cheaper generic drugs on the market and cut the cost of other prescription drugs. Already it is being heralded as the most significant piece of consumer legislation in decades.
While drug companies and industry associations publicly insist that such competition has not stimulated any industrywide moves toward advertising, observers say privately that some foreign-based drug companies, advertising agencies, and media companies - all eager for a piece of the lucrative US pharmaceutical market - are spurring the debate.
Some manufacturers, including the US subsidiary of the British-based Boots Pharmaceuticals Inc., have already experimented with limited consumer promotions. And Ciba-Geigy has publicly endorsed the idea as deserving study. ''We recognize there are lots of risks,'' says David Taylor, Ciba-Geigy's public policy director. ''But a lot depends upon how it's developed and what the regulations are.''
Some other drugmakers, however, remain wary of the abuses that could result from mass merchandising of prescription items. They insist that such advertising would entail significant legal risks if it didn't fully explain the possible hazards. They fear it might also incur a consumer backlash and inflate health-care costs - without providing any guaranteed return on the investment.
''Prescription-drug advertising to consumers is not an idea whose time has come,'' says Laurence Hoff, executive vice-president of the Upjohn Company. ''Certainly it would not benefit the consumer. We think more should be done with public-service announcements and generic-health-care ads that are allowed under current regulations.''
Indeed, many professional groups, including the American Medical Association, have taken official positions opposing direct-to-consumer advertising. According to an AMA spokesman, the association objects to the public marketing of prescription drugs for three reasons: the potential abuse of the doctor-patient relationship; the possibility of medically unnecessary use of drugs; and the probable increased costs of medical care. A recent study by the American Pharmaceutical Association showed that more than 50 percent of pharmacists polled also objected to direct-to-consumer advertising.
Other critics of the change, including the American Association of Retired Persons (AARP), whose 16 million members are the largest users of prescription drugs in the country, agree. They and other consumer groups have consistently lobbied against any mass-marketing campaigns, insisting that advertising is meant to increase sales, not convey unbiased information.
''It's not a move oriented to information, but towards promotion,'' says Ann Averyt of the Consumer Federation of America, a coalition of more than 200 consumer groups opposed to direct-to-consumer drug advertising. Ms. Averyt cites a recent FDA study that showed the majority of people exposed to drug advertising in a test situation recalled a drug's advertised beneficial effects rather than its risks. ''No country in the world allows prescription-drug advertising on TV,'' she adds.
Other critics insist that the ability of federal regulatory agencies to monitor abuses is itself in question. ''The FDA and [Federal Trade Commission] just do not have the resources to monitor all the drug ads now,'' said Fred Wegner, an AARP pharmaceutical specialist, at a recent symposium. ''There is a very real concern that prescription-drug ads can't be regulated at all.''

 

End of Document


THE NITRITE SYNDROME; by Jack D. Early
The New York Times
June 30, 1981, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition GIN> , , Late City Final Edition

 Copyright 1981 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 35, Column 4; Editorial Desk; op-ed
Length: 809 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




When Federal regulators said recently that they had changed their minds and would not ban nitrites, the commonly used food preservative that prevents botulism and other forms of food poisoning, the announcement was viewed in some quarters as a cause for rejoicing.
After all, reason had won out. The bureaucrats, after examining the evidence, had decided that the known problems that could be triggered by eliminating nitrites far outweighed the hypothetical dangers posed by continued use.
Yet, the Food and Drug Administration's ''recall of its intended recall'' is only another skirmish in a longstanding battle. It doesn't solve anything. We are still bogged down in a regulatory quagmire in which health-related decisions are being based on legal technicalities rather than on medical and scientific truth.
Jack Early op-ed comment scores past Government policy on suspected carcinogenic chemicals for lacking proper means of risk assessment
The safety of food preservatives, additives, and pesticides is an important public concern. It calls for judicious and competent scientific assessment, and responsible public disclosure and handling.
Currently, however, presumed hazards are being announced publicly in terms that incur emotional rather than factual reflections on the situation, leading the public to believe that there is a crisis when none in fact exists. That was the case with nitrites, saccharin, and even Love Canal.
Unfortunately, even the reversal of a regulatory decision or the vindication of a product leaves the public still uncertain about its safety. The net effect is public reluctance to accept fully the regulatory agency's final word and an erosion of confidence in the agency involved. Even when the Government reverses itself, the damage can never be completely undone.
Biological science, especially toxicology, is a dynamic discipline. Ethical scientists will report results ranging from highly guarded presumptions to fairly assured conclusions, depending on the objective, the design, and the merits of a study.
The nonscientific public official tends not to distinguish among such data and therefore considers both extremes equally creditable for regulatory purposes. Presumptive evidence is arbitrarily assigned a level of credibility that was not intended and cannot be scientifically justified without further investigation and is used as a makeshift trigger for regulatory action.
This most often seems to be the case when agencies deal with the carcinogenic potential of chemicals. In the nitrites case, the announcement of a proposed ban preceded the completion and analysis of toxicological investigations intended to help resolve earlier presumptions; no peer review was even requested.
While such actions sometimes can be corrected, regulators are constrained when they have to implement legislation where risk assessment is not permitted, as in the Food and Drug Administration's Delaney clause (named for a former Congressman, James Delaney), which is an amendment to the 1938 Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, and instructs the F.D.A. to ban anything it believes to have a carcinogenic potential.
The clause in effect writes into legislation two scientific hypotheses: first, that any compound that induces cancer in animals is a human carcinogen, and, second, that there is no threshold or societally acceptable level for exposure to such a compound.
The Delaney approach has been embraced by most of the regulatory bureaucracy and heavily influenced the Environmental Protection Agency's first five years of pesticide regulation. DDT, for example, was said to pose a ''remote and unquantifiable risk'' of cancer on the basis of mouse studies, so it was banned.
Experience has subsequently forced the Agency to recognize, as expressed in its current policy on cancer, that the Delaney approach is often impracticable and unacceptable because ''in many areas risks cannot be eliminated completely without unacceptable social and economic consequences.''
Despite this pronouncement in the Environmental Protection Agency's interim policy on cancer, the ghost of the Delaney approach continues to haunt regulatory thinking.
The determination of a substance's carcinogenic potential includes the extrapolation and assessment of risk to humans. It is a complex process that must be done by a properly constituted scientific group devoid of any regulatory responsibility.
Legislation has been introduced in the House that would establish a National Science Council to decide all questions of scientific fact that arise in the regulatory agencies.
It seems a modest step in the proper direction and one that the 97th Congress should view with favor.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Jack D. Early is president of the National Agricultural Chemicals Association, a trade and lobbying organization.
 Graphic



 
Illustrations: drawing

 

End of Document


DOCTORS STRETCH RULES ON AIDS DRUG
The New York Times
December 21, 1987, Monday, Late City Final Edition

 Copyright 1987 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk
Length: 1231 words
Byline: By GINA KOLATA
Body




Defying official recommendations, a growing number of doctors who treat carriers of the AIDS virus are prescribing a powerful, potentially toxic drug even before the patients develop serious signs of disease.
The drug is azidothymidine, or AZT, which is licensed by the Food and Drug Administration only for certain patients with AIDS itself or who show some disease symptoms and whose immune systems are seriously damaged, groups in which the benefits of AZT have been established. But once a drug is approved, doctors may legally prescribe it to any patient.
Every one of more than a dozen AIDS physicians and health authorities interviewed said prescribing AZT to patients without symptoms had become a widespread practice as the drug, once scarce, became readily available.
 
Doctors Split on Usage
The practice has split the medical community. Some doctors supported it as a compassionate response to an unusual threat. Others were deeply alarmed, saying they could not recall when a drug with such toxic potential had been so widely prescribed for a condition other than those specified by the Food and Drug Administration.
''I don't think there was ever before a situation like this in medicine,'' said Dr. Itzhak Brook of the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences in Bethesda, Md., who was chairman of an F.D.A advisory committee that evaluated AZT. ''This is just what I was afraid of.''
Experts who, like Dr. Brook, are worried about the trend say that for relatively healthy patients there is no proof that AZT will provide benefits that outweigh the substantial risks. Those risks include the suppression of bone marrow, which can cause severe anemia and make patients vulnerable to life-threatening infections.
 
Fear Moves Doctor and Patient
But even the staunchest critics are sympathetic to the plight of frightened patients and their doctors. Some of these doctors find it impossible to refrain from using the drug, knowing that it may be only a matter of time until the patient's immune system falters still more and he develops the fatal symptoms of acquired immune deficiency syndrome.
''I'm very wary'' of giving the drug to healthy AIDS virus carriers, said Dr. Jeffrey Laurence of the Cornell University School of Medicine.''But there are a lot of scared people out there.''
Dr. William Siroty, a New York City doctor who treats patients with AIDS, said he gave AZT to healthy virus carriers when they wanted it. Many patients who know they are infected with the AIDS virus ''feel better knowing they're doing something about it,'' he said.
Mounting evidence, experts say, indicates that a substantial number, probably a majority, of people infected with the AIDS virus will eventually develop AIDS. But many people have carried the virus for years without serious ill effects. Some doctors worry that premature use of AZT will deprive such patients of healthy years without providing any sure benefits.
 
Use of Unproved Drugs
In addition to AZT, worried carriers of the virus are taking various unproved drugs, many of which experts said were probably harmless. But some experts are concerned that these alternative treatments may harm the patients.
The aggressive treatment also reflects a dismay among those active in the drive against AIDS and some doctors over what they regard as the slow pace of Government-sponsored research.
Others say that sound studies necessarily take time. They add that no useful scientific information will result from the wide dispensing of the drug since no data are being gathered.
''The best thing to do now is to let the scientific community work this out,'' said Dr. Samuel Broder of the National Cancer Institute, who played a key role in the development of AZT.
AZT is the only drug on the market for the treatment of AIDS. Although it does not cure AIDS, it does extend the lives of some AIDS patients. The Federal Government is starting studies to see if the drug helps patients who are less ill than the original study group, but officials said it would be years before answers were in. #10,000 in U.S. Take AZT The manufacturer, the Burroughs Wellcome Company, said that more than 10,000 Americans were taking AZT but that it had no precise figures, nor any record of how many met the guidelines for its use. Nationally, no one keeps data even on the number of patients who would theoretically meet the guidelines, or what proportion of them are taking the drug.
In addition to AZT's dangerous side effects, another drawback of the drug is its expense. AZT has cost many patients as much as $10,000 a year, although doctors said that most insurance companies were not balking at paying for it even when the patients were not seriously ill. Last week, Burroughs Wellcome reduced the wholesale price of AZT by 20 percent, but the cost will still be high.
Some doctors assert there is reason to believe that AZT can help patients who have not yet become ill and that its side effects may be less severe for them. ''It is believed, but not proven, that the drug is much easier to tolerate when you're healthy,'' said Dr. Michael Greico, chief of infectious diseases at St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital in New York City. ''We don't know if it will retard the development of the disease, but it is likely that it will,'' he added.
 
T Cells Used as a Barometer
Doctors who are giving AZT to healthier patients emphasize that they are not prescribing it blindly. Instead, they are monitoring the patients' immune cells and are suggesting use of the drug only when they believe the patient's T-4 cells, immune system cells that the AIDS virus attacks, are dropping dangerously low.
This leads them into what some say is the shaky science of T-cell numerology. A normal T-4 cell count is 800 to 1,000 cells per cubic centimeter of blood. As an AIDS infection progresses, the number of T-4 cells drop. But experts disagree on exactly what the numbers mean.
Everyone agrees that a patient with a T-4 cell count of less than 200 has a seriously crippled immune system. But a low T-4 cell count does not always mean imminent AIDS. ''I've followed patients who had T-4 cell counts of less than 10 for a year, and nothing happened to them,'' said Dr. Douglas Dieterich of New York University Medical Center.
 
Where to Draw the Line
Some of the doctors offering AZT to healthier patients do so when their T-4 cell counts have dropped to 200, even if no disease symptoms are present. Others offer it to anyone whose T-4 cell count is dropping rapidly, others suggest it to those whose count is less than 300, others use 400 to 500 as a cut-off, and still others have no set guidelines but let the patients decide if they want the drug.
Dr. Jack Weissman, a New York City physician who has several hundred patients who are infected with the AIDS virus, explained why some doctors, including himself, were defying the AZT guidelines and prescribing unproved new drugs.
''I know you don't get better by yourself,'' he said. ''If I see that your T cells are dropping by 50 points a month, I can wait until you-know-what hits the fan. Or I can anticipate and try and head off what I think is a certainty.''
Dr. Weissman added that with AZT in particular, patients whose T-4 cell count was dropping must ask themselves, ''Do you want to wait until you qualify for the drug?'' After all, he said, ''sooner or later you're going to qualify, no question about it.''
 Graphic



 
Photos of Dr. Jeffrey Laurence; Dr. William Siroty (pg. A20) (NYT/Don Hogan Charles)

 

End of Document


Congressman Calls for Justice Investigation of Drug Maker
The Associated Press
May 5, 1984, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1984 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 719 words
Byline: By BETTY ANNE WILLIAMS, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Food and Drug Administration is acknowledging it made a mistake in allowing sales to continue of an unapproved intravenous vitamin E drug which has been linked with the deaths of 38 premature infants.
But Rep. Ted Weiss, D-N.Y., said Friday the Justice Department should consider prosecuting the drug's manufacturer and he said perhaps the time had come for an overhaul of the FDA.
"The way it looks now, when the American public takes a drug, it cannot be sure that the FDA has done right by them as far as protection," Weiss said at a hearing of the House Government Operations subcommittee on intergovernmental relations.
Dr. Mark Novitch, acting commissioner of the FDA, disagreed.
"I think the FDA is a well-functioning agency. I think the American people do too. The system failed badly in this instance. But with all due respect, I reject the notion that the agency is a failing agency," he said.
The hearing was called to look into the FDA's handling of E-Ferol Aqueous Solution, a drug which has been linked with serious illnesses in 43 infants at 35 hospitals in addition to the 38 deaths. E-Ferol Aqueous Solution is made by Carter-Glogau, a wholly owned subsidiary of Revco D.S. Inc. of Twinsburg, Ohio.
Weiss attacked the FDA for deciding not to interfere with distribution of the drug in November 1983 after a Fairfax, Va., pharmacist notified the agency that the drug was being sold without clearance. The agency did not learn of safety problems with the drug until April 2 of this year.
"What we realize with the benefit of hindsight is, that was a wrong decision," said Dr. Harry Meyer, Director of the FDA's Center for Drugs and Biologics.
"This product should have had more scrutiny than it got," added Novitch.
The subcommittee also was told that the drug distributor knew deaths might have been associated with use of E-Ferol as early as January 1982. But this information was not passed on to the FDA. In addition, Dr. Curtis Paul McCammon, director of Tennessee Memorial Research Center and Hospital in Knoxville, Tenn., said company officials told his hospital that they did not know of any deaths or injuries linked with the drug when the hospital made inquiries on March 19, 1984, after five infant deaths there.
A Spokane, Wash., neonatologist who stopped using the drug in his practice in January 1984 after at least three deaths, said he reported those deaths the same month to the drug's distributor, O'Neal, Jones and Feldman Pharmaceuticals of Maryland Heights, Mo. A woman who answered the phone Friday at the offices of O'Neal, Jones and Feldman said the company would have no comment. She refused to give her name.
Dr. Carl Bodenstein, who practices at Sacred Heart Hospital and Deaconess Medical Center in Spokane, said the hospital informed the FDA regional office of a problem with the drug but did not mention the deaths.
Novitch said the FDA might have been able to have the drug recalled earlier than it did on April 10 if hospitals which suspected a problem with the drug had informed the agency.
"If they had told us there were deaths, we could have acted that day," Novitch said.
Lee Goldman, a spokeswoman for Revco, declined to comment on specific allegations made during the hearing. But she said: "We are aware of Congressman Weiss' statements. We are going to be doing a thorough study. We expect to demonstrate that his comments about Carter-Glogau history and FDA compliance are erroneous." The company was not asked to testify.
Weiss said, "As far as I'm concerned, information such as this is going to be referred to the Justice Department for whatever civil and criminal actions they feel appropriate as far as the distributor and-or manufacturer is concerned."
Vitamin E drugs have been sold since the 1940s for injection into the muscle and for oral administration. But an intravenous version of the drug was not available until E-Ferol came on the market. The FDA has one new drug application pending for an intravenous Vitamin E drug.
With premature infants, Vitamin E may be given as a nutritional supplement and to treat blindness which sometimes occurs in newborns.
The infants who became ill after use of the drug suffered accumulations of fluid in the abdominal cavity, enlarged liver and spleen, jaundice and low blood platelet count which can interfere with clotting.

 

End of Document


u.s. pharmacists try to prevent drug interactions
The Xinhua General Overseas News ServiceXinhua General News Service
JULY 22, 1984, SUNDAY

 Length: 255 words
Dateline: washington, july 21; Item No: 072217
Body




u.s. pharmacists began using computers to avoid dangerous interactions between the drugs and food patients take.
the boston collaborative drug surveillance program at boston university, a clearinghouse for information on the side effects of drugs, estimates that 4.5 billion u.s. dollars in hospital bills and over 100 deaths result from such interaction in the united states a year.
a recent survey of medical-glaser stores indicated that 15 to 17 percent of all the prescriptions involved some kind of potential drug interaction, and five percent of these could have resulted in hospitalization or death.
however, bruce h. colligen, director of special studies for the u.s. national association of chain drug stores in alexandria, va., said the use of computers makes it possible to avoid the dangerous interactions. computer systems will be able to help determine which patients have purchased drugs that have been recalled by their manufacturers.  the computers will also be able to alert pharmacists when patients are refilling prescriptions more or less than they should be.
with the computer, the pharmacists can call up the patients' profile to see if there are dangerous interactions between the chemicals in the prescription and those that are part of the customer's daily life.  if a problem is found, the patient's physician is called.
so far, 20 percent of the drug stores in the united states are fully computerized, and by 1990, that number will probably be 90 or 95 percent, director colligen said.

 

End of Document


F.D.A. Chief Says Most Generics Meet Standards
The New York Times
November 18, 1989, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 1989 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk
Length: 333 words
Byline: By WARREN E. LEARY, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Nov. 17
Body




Government tests of the 30 best-selling generic drugs show that only 1.1 percent do not meet standards, Food and Drug Administration officials said today.
Dr. Frank E. Young, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, who is leaving for another job in the Bush Administration, told a Congressional hearing on generic drugs that there was no indication that any ''poison pills'' had reached the market because of bribery, data falsification and product-switching uncovered so far by investigators.
He said F.D.A. laboratories tested 2,556 samples of different forms of the drugs and found that only 27 did not meet specifications for potency, purity, uniformity in dissolving, amount of active ingredients and other factors that affect a drug's effectiveness. The 1.1 percent deficiency found is consistent with the rates normally found for brand-name and generic products as a whole, Dr. Young said.
But he told the House Energy and Commerce Investigations Subcommittee that more work needed to be done to clean up the industry and that his agency needed more authority to punish offenders. The panel has been looking into the Government's regulation of the generic drug industry, which markets low-cost copies of brand-name drugs.
 
'Our Job Is Not Done'
He said: ''Are the generic drugs on the market safe and effective? The answer appears to be a qualified yes.''
''Our job is not done,'' Dr. Young went on, ''and we will keep that qualification until we are done.''
Because of the current investigations, F.D.A. officials said generic drug companies have recalled or otherwise withdrawn 54 drugs because of problems from manufacturing deficiencies to cheating on safety tests.
The F.D.A. has also started withdrawing its approval of almost 30 products from 5 of the nation's more than 300 generic-drug makers.
Representative John D. Dingell, Democrat of Michigan, chairman of the committee, said condemned the Health and Human Services Department for leaving the F.D.A. ''rudderless in the middle of this crisis.''

 

End of Document


Inhalers for Asthma Recalled
The New York Times
April 7, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

 Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 1; Part 1; Page 14, Column 5; National Desk
Length: 95 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: WASHINGTON, April 6
Body




A drug company is voluntarily recalling two prescription inhalers used by asthmatics because the products may not contain enough medication to provide relief, the Food and Drug Administration announced today. The F.D.A. said the products were Metaprel Metered Dose Inhaler and Metaprel Asthma Mist, distributed by Dorsey Laboratories of Lincoln, Neb.
Food and Drug Administration announces that Dorsey Laboratories, drug company, is voluntarily recalling two prescription inhalers used by asthmatics because products may not contain enough medication to provide relief (S)

 

End of Document


U.S. generic drug firms under the gun
The Toronto Star
September 25, 1989, Monday, FINAL EDITION

 Copyright 1989 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
Section: BUSINESS TODAY; Pg. D4
Length: 701 words
Byline: By Janice Turner Toronto Star
Body



For more than 20 years, generic drugmakers have been bringing low-cost medicine to the masses.
Vastly cheaper copies of brand-name drugs, generics have been a blessing to low-income consumers and health care providers struggling to keep a lid on costs.
But south of the border the success story has been soured. The United States generic drug industry is reeling from scandal and undergoing the most intensive regulatory review in its history.
To date, the U.S. federal probe has resulted in more than 27 generic product recalls at the wholesale level to verify product safety and effectiveness. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) officials are also testing the potency of the 30 largest-selling generics in the U.S.
Fraud, corruption
FDA officials stress that there is no evidence to date to suggest that any of the recalls involve serious health risks.
The U.S. review, which followed disclosures last spring of fraud and corruption within the generic industry and the FDA, have so far found irregularities in manufacturing and record-keeping practices at nearly a dozen generic drugmakers. An additional 20 generic firms are still under investigation.
A special U.S. congressional subcommittee has heard that some manufacturers had faked or altered test results submitted to the FDA to get their drugs speedily approved.
The subcommittee's investigation was prompted by evidence obtained by a generic firm.
Par Pharmaceuticals Inc., of Spring Valley, N.Y., and its Quad Pharmaceuticals Inc. subsidiary pleaded guilty in July to paying off FDA product reviewers. Two chemists from the FDA and a former officer of each company - Par, Quad and Pharmaceutical Basics, of Morton Grove, Ill. - also pleaded guilty to taking or providing illegal gratuities.
Here in Canada, health officials stress that the industry's problems are restricted to the U.S. None of the generic drugs recalled or being investigated south of the border are manufactured or distributed in Canada, said Dr. John Riou, director of field operations with the Health Protection Branch.
"This is not an issue of science, but an issue of integrity," said Dr. Ken Michalko, chief of branch's biopharmaceutics evaluation.
The U.S. generic industry maintains that the problems stem from a few bad apples and that generics continue to provide safe and affordable options for consumers.
'Climate of fear'
At least one firm, blasted the congressional subcommittee for creating a "climate of fear and distrust within the entire generic pharmaceutical industry."
Canadian industry spokesmen are playing down the bad press.
"A few companies got greedy and bypassed the system," said Wayne Schnarr, research director for the Canadian Drug Manufacturers' Association, representing about 20 generic drug firms. "None of the companies are members of our association and no members of our association have been implicated."
Although Schnarr conceded public confidence has been shaken, "doctors in the U.S. haven't stopped prescribing generics and pharmacists haven't stopped ordering them."
In the United States, where 300 generic firms aggressively compete, generic drugs hold a hefty one-third of the prescription market. (In Canada, the figure is less than 20 per cent.)
Dr. Sidney Wolfe, of the Public Citizen Health Research Group, a Washington-based watchdog, is a critic of both the FDA and the pharmaceutical industry.
He said the controversy underlines the gross inefficencies of the FDA.
"Fortunately this time these are procedural foul-ups that have not resulted in any harm to the public," said Wolfe. "Trying to speed up drug approvals is an old issue. But during the last eight years the FDA has sent out the message that it's reluctant to enforce the law. It's let the industry do what it wants."
Riou in Ottawa said that in Canada branded and generic manufacturers are "no better or no worse than each other in terms of compliance."
Dr. Bill Wensley, registrar of the Ontario College of Pharmacists, the professional licensing and regulatory body, said there is no reason to believe approval problems exist in Canada.
"The people of Ontario have every reason to be confident."
 Load-Date: May 13, 1999

 

End of Document


Europe Worries it Will Catch Crack's Continental Drift
The Associated Press
August 26, 1989, Saturday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 940 words
Byline: By MAGGIE JACKSON, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: LONDON
Body




Crack seizures in Western Europe amount to a few ounces a year, a tiny haul alongside the U.S. flood. But many Europeans are getting worried.
"Crack is the specter I see hanging over Europe," Britain's home secretary, Douglas Hurd, told delegates of the 23-nation Council of Europe whom he invited to London in May to discuss drug abuse.
"Our job must be to work together, urgently, to ensure that the United States experience is not repeated here," he said.
Britain is the only European country already battling a crack problem. But with crack's parent drug, cocaine, flowing into Europe alongside horrifying images of crack's impact in the United States, vigilance is increasing.
Interpol, the Paris-based international police agency, now monitors all crack seizures, rather than only those of over 100 grams, or 3.5 ounces.
Agents of the Drug Enforcement Agency have held a workshop to teach Italians how to spot "il crack," and the problem is likely to be high on the agendas of two major drug conferences.
Crack is a smokeable derivative of cocaine that gives an instant, intense "high" as the drug goes straight to the brain, but wears off in a few minutes, leaving a lingering deep depression.
But Europeans are divided over the size of the wolf at the door. The Dutch predict they won't even have a problem. Others doubt crack could find the home in Europe that it has in the United States, where crime and drug abuse rates are higher.
West German police have seized so little that they are not keeping track. Swedish police say they have heard of its use but haven't seized any. The Swiss confiscated two grams in 1988. Spain and Italy have seized none.
"The general rule is that Europe is four to six years behind the States," says Gerhard Neurohr, head of Interpol's cocaine division. "Of course, every rule has its exceptions and crack may be an exception.
"But then remember Angel Dust (slang for Phenyl Cyclohexyl Piperidine, a powerful psychedelic drug). It swept the United States and everybody waited in Europe for an Angel Dust wave that never happened."
Nowhere is the debate more heated than in Britain, which had 31 crack seizures in the first six months of 1989, and 27 in the same period last year. British authorities say they seized 102 grams, about 3.6 ounces, between January 1987 and June 1989, 68 grams, or 2.4 ounces, of it in the first half of this year.
"Although the number of seizures is still small, they have been quite widespread, with crack found in many of our major cities," Hurd told another, privately sponsored crack conference in July.
Problem users have appeared in the last 15 months in south London, says Steve Tippell, who heads a counseling center there and is touring U.S. cities to study their responses.
Because of crack's high cost here, Tippell says most users in the British capital make their own crack, which is easy to convert from cocaine. A "rock" of two smokes costs $$30 to $$40, double the price in the United States.
Interpol says crack seizures in Europe total 600 grams, about 22 ounces, since 1986, although British drug experts say this might not include small amounts seized.
Cocaine seizures, on the other hand, rose from 345 pounds in 1978 to almost six tons last year in Europe, exceeding the heroin haul for the first time, Interpol says.
"We were caught napping when heroin first arrived in the early '70s," says Hans Lundborg, narcotics bureau chief at Sweden's Ministry for Social Affairs. "The government can't afford to make that same mistake again."
Britain is emphasizing education and treatment rather than all-out attempts to stop suppliers.
"The Americans are quite clear that if they would have their time over again, they would have given more emphasis to prevention work," says Hurd.
He told the Council of Europe meeting that Britain will increase annual funding for education and teacher training to $$11 million, and provide extra cash for drug treatment and U.N. drug programs.
Britain also will host an international conference next year on fighting drugs, especially crack, and the European Parliament and Commission will hold a similar meeting in the spring.
"I am convinced that crack is on its way," says Sir Jack Stewart-Clark, a British European Parliament lawmaker helping organize the Parliament meeting.
"The American situation today is likely to be the European situation tomorrow, with some slight differences," he said in a telephone interview.
A non-partisan group of British lawmakers, returning alarmed from a study trip to the United States, called for targeting demand by setting up U.S.-style helplines and a national public awareness campaign.
Despite his strong statements, Hurd rejects a national campaign against crack, saying this would advertise the drug.
Ministers recall a national drive against heroin several years ago that was widely believed to have glamorized the drug.
To portray crack "sensationally as uniquely diabolical will only add to its allure," wrote addiction experts John Strang and Griffith Edwards in an Aug. 5 British Medical Journal editorial.
But Dave Turner, director of an umbrella group of drug organizations says: "Some of the hype about crack and cocaine is important in order to put pressure on the government."
Interpol's Neurohr also cites the high cost of crack in Europe as well as a different mentality toward cocaine as reasons why Europe may not be too badly affected.
"In the States, crack is a cheap drug for social underdogs," he told The Associated Press. "In Europe, social underdogs drink alcohol or shoot heroin or take amphetamines.
"People here are well-informed … even drug addicts discuss the dangers of crack."

 

End of Document


Some Analysts See Prices Rising, Others Don't
The Associated Press
October 9, 1989, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1989 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 756 words
Byline: By DEBORAH MESCE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Some generic drug makers and industry observers say an anticipated shakeout in the industry and the prospect of more rigorous safety testing will force up prices for these consumer bargains.
But others say the industry will remain competitive enough to withstand the financial pressures without price increases.
Generic drugs, which account for about a third of all prescriptions nationwide, now offer consumers savings averaging 50 percent to 70 percent over their brand-name counterparts - and in some cases the savings are many times greater.
Disclosures that some manufacturers cheated on product testing has raised the expectation that the Food and Drug Administration will require more rigorous testing and tighten and control over approval of generic drugs.
"The prices for generics will show a gradual increase … but still will be substantially below brand-name drugs," said John H. Klein, president of Zenith Laboratories in Northvale, N.J.
Klein, who with an investor group took the company out of bankruptcy last year and anticipates generic-drug sales of $$36 million to $$40 million this year, also predicts an end to cut-throat pricing in the generic industry as companies realize that setting prices below costs to gain market share is unprofitable.
The FDA has no formal proposal for tougher regulations, but agency officials have been discussing the need for more staff, the possibility of imposing user fees on the generic industry for new drug application filings and more rigorous safety testing.
"All of those things will affect the cost of the generic drug," said Henry F. Blissenbach, director of pharmacy programs for United HealthCare Corp., a Minneapolis-based manager of health maintenance organizations.
But an official at Rugby Laboratories in Rockville Center, N.Y., a privately-held generic drug maker said by analysts to be the largest in the country with about $$500 million in annual sales, disagrees.
Martin Zeiger, executive vice president and general counsel of Rugby, said the additional costs would not be significant enough to force prices higher.
"It's a very competitive industry," he said. "We don't see the prices increasing at all."
Analysts anticipate that some generic manufacturers will not make it through the scandal. Hemant K. Shah, a pharmaceutical analyst at HKS & Co., expects that more than half of the top 20 generic drug makers - which account for 90 percent of the generic business - will disappear within five years.
"But still the prices of generics probably are not going to rise because six or 10 companies are still enough for some form of pricing pressure," he said.
Ronald Nordmann, a pharmaceutical analyst with PaineWebber Inc., said it is too early to tell whether generic prices will go up. But he predicts the power of the industry will shift to the brand-name companies, which make a large share of generic products.
Most observers agree that the problems being sorted out by the FDA and within the industry will delay the processing of applications for new generic drugs, at least for the short term.
Drug expenses for some consumers have already gone up. With some generic products having been taken off the market as a result of the investigation, some drugs are left without a lower-cost alternative.
"The costs to pharmacists are going up for selected products, but not overall," said Steve Grote, vice president of purchasing for the American Association of Retired Persons Pharmacy Service. Prices have not risen for AARP pharmacy customers, though, because prices are set for a year, he added.
The biggest impact of generic drug recalls may be seen by patients taking the high-blood-pressure drug Dyazide or its generic version.
One of the drug's two clones was removed from the market earlier this year when its maker, Vitarine Pharmaceutical Inc., admitted cheating on safety tests to win FDA approval. Now, the FDA is trying to remove the other generic version from the market, saying its maker, Bolar Pharmaceutical Co. Inc., misrepresented test data to the agency.
Kaiser Permanente, the nation's largest health maintenance organization, has already stopped dispensing the Bolar product, which is about half the price of Dyazide. However, the impact has been "insignificant on our total program costs," said Dale Kramer, who handles pharmacy purchasing for Kaiser.
For others not protected by volume purchasing, though, the removal of Bolar's product from the market would mean higher prices for some consumers, at least until another generic version could win FDA approval.

 

End of Document
