
User Name: = 
Date and Time: = 2024-11-21
Job Number: = 239221646

Documents (200)
Client/Matter: -None-
Search Terms: drug recall
Search Type: NaturalAnd
Content Type
Narrowed by
news
Industry: Pharmaceuticals & Biotechnology Timeline: 01 Jan, 1990 to 31 Dec, 1999 

1. Warner Lambert Recalls Eight Drugs

2. DRUG RECALL

3. Firms recall drug with potentially fatal side effects

4. 14 dead, government recalls drug

5. Company Recalling Cough Drug

6. Diet drug recall hits 'innocent' drugs as dieters go cold turkey

7. Recall of drug finds counterfeit

8. Doctors fail drug recall

9. FDA Recalls Drug Because of Mislabeled Bottles

10. Upjohn Recalls Polluted Drug Medicine

11. Company Recalls Blood Pressure Drug

12. Diet drug recall hits both drug makers and diet chains

13. Blood-clotting drug recalled

14. Diet drug recall hits both drug makers and diet chains

15. Blood-Clotting Drug Recalled

16. Diet Recall Hits Drug Makers

17. Epilepsy drug recalled

18. JUDGE ORDERS RECALL OF GENERIC DRUGS

19. Biocraft Recalls Some Drugs as Part of Government Settlement

20. Baxter Recalls Drug Product After Autopsy Shows Donor's Rare Disease

21. HEMOPHILIA DRUG RECALLED

22. Top generic drug recalled

23. BIOCRAFT TO RECALL 9 DRUGS; SETTLES OUT OF COURT WITH GOVERNMENT

24. Kidney drug recalled

25. Japan recalls faulty AIDS test drug

26. Generic Asthma Drug Recalled

27. CONSUMER ALERT: DRUG RECALL

28. Recall May Limit Drug-Device Supply

29. 3M Recalls Migraine Drug Lot Due to Nausea, Vomiting

30. German Company Recalls AIDS Test Drug Worldwide

31. RESPIRATORY AILMENT DRUG BEING RECALLED

32. Judges Orders Limited Recall of Drugs, But Not Shutdown of Barr Labs

33. WARNER-LAMBERT VOLUNTARILY RECALLING SELECT DRUGS FROM DIRECT ACCOUNTS

34. Class-action lawsuits blame recalled diet drugs for ailments

35. Class-action lawsuit blames recalled diet drugs for ailments

36. GROUP DEMANDS FDA RECALL OF DRUG LINKED TO SUICIDE/DEATHS

37. Generic Drugs Recalled After Questions on Data

38. Obesity Drug Recall Ends MIT Royalties

39. FDA Orders Recall of New Antibiotic Drug

40. A Recalled Diet Drug and Autism

41. HEART DRUG RECALLED AFTER FDA SEIZURE

42. AHP Earnings Drop Over Drug Recall

43. Study shows low consumer recall of advertised drugs

44. Recall of Drugs Leaves Many Dieters Hopeless

45. ALLERGY REACTION INJECTIONS RECALLED; DRUG MAY NOT WORK IN 550,000 KITS FOR ASTHMA, STINGS

46. Doctor on road to recovery Bangor neurologist recalls drug battle

47. Mold, microbes force drug recall

48. Judge Orders Limited Recall of Barr Labs Drugs

49. Recall of Clot-Busting Drug Urged

50. Epilepsy drug recall causes customer confidence crisis

51. Potent asthma drug recalled by maker

52. Recall of Clot-Busting Drug Urged

53. Drug Manufacturer Biocraft Ordered to Recall Lots of Drugs, Halt Others

54. Recall of Clot-Busting Drug Urged

55. Company Curtailing Heart Drug Announces Recalls

56. Abbott stock drops after drug recall

57. NEW INDIANA FIRM TO NOTIFY PHARMACIES OF DRUG RECALLS

58. Drug company expands recall of Albuminar Plasma drug suspected in four blood poisonings

59. Centeon Recalls Batch of Hemophiliac Drug

60. Health Ministry, FDA recall two diet drugs

61. Centeon Recalls Batch of Hemophiliac Drug

62. DRUG BOOKLET RECALL

63. Diet drug maker expects little long-term effect from drug recall

64. New Jersey -Based Drug Maker Recalls Allergy Kit

65. Diet drug maker expects little long-term effect from drug recall

66. German Company Recalling AIDS Test Drug Worldwide With BC- Japan -AIDS Teste

67. DRUG RECALLED AFTER DOSAGE ERROR

68. CONGRESS TOLD PROZAC CAUSES SUICIDE, DRUG RECALL URGED

69. DRUG RECALLED AFTER DOSAGE ERROR

70. FED: BLOOD PRESSURE DRUG RECALLED

71. Judge dumps lawsuit claiming executives profited before drug recall

72. Dieters upset over recall of wonder drugs

73. Dieters Upset Over Drug Recall

74. Dieters upset over recall of diet drugs

75. SWIM: CHINA RECALLS SWIMMER AFTER DRUG SEIZURE

76. ATTACK RECALLS ERA OF DRUG WARS

77. SCIENTOLOGY TELLS CONGRESS PROZAC CAUSES SUICIDE; DRUG RECALL URGED

78. Anti-Depressant Drug Recalled Because Of Mislabeling

79. Maker of allergy drug recalls emergency kits

80. Second Generic High Blood Pressure Drug Recalled

81. Recalled Heart Drug Poses Risk Even After Patients Stop Using It

82. The recall of wonder drugs irks diet users

83. Diet drug maker expects little long-term effect from drug recall

84. Two weight-loss drugs recalled by manufacturers

85. 3M recalls units of migraine drug taken by inhaler

86. Mad cow link in kidney drug recall

87. Atlanta Games; 2 Days to Go; City; Olympic Forum; Lewis recalls drug scandal at Seoul Games

88. Drug Company Recalling Asthma Medicine

89. DIET OF DRUGS: RECALL SPURS DESIRE FOR SUBSTITUTES

90. German firm recalls AIDS test drug Removed worldwide after it failed to detect HIV in one case, company says

91. Chinese 'drugs' swimmer recalled; SWIMMING

92. COMMUNITY MUTUAL AIDING IN DRUG RECALL MANDATED BY THE FDA

93. DIET DRUG USERS HERE MOURN RECALL BY FDA

94. Drug recall will continue to plague company into 1997

95. Glaxo Wellcome faces hit of 270m pounds from drug recall

96. Mural recalls fond memories of drug store

97. Drugs cloud Gazza recall

98. PM-Counterfeit-Drugs, Bgt ; Budget; Phoney packaging, tampering prompts drug recall, police probe

99. HIV-test drug found unreliable, product recalled

100. Banned drug 'mule' recalled by Beijing

101. DRUGS FIRM RECALLS CAPSULES AFTER 'SLEEPY' MIX UP

102. Day-leave drug deals, recalls former inmate

103. STUDY THAT USED NOW-RECALLED DIET DRUG IS CALLED RISKY, RACIST / RESEARCHERS LOOKED AT THE ROOTS OF VIOLENCE. THEY SAID THE MINORITY CHILDREN HAD BEEN IN NO DANGER.

104. Nation in Brief Drug firm recalls inhalation solution

105. Counterfeit drug probed: Prescriptions recalled

106. Duramed recalls drug products

107. AM-Heart-Drug-Recall ; TOR OUT; ; Heart drug recalled

108. String of drug recalls raises questions about FDA approval; NATIONAL NEWS BRIEFS

109. Importer ordered to recall drug

110. Shares hit by drug recall: Warner-Lambert and Sankyo see falls after Glaxo withdraws diabetes remedy

111. Drug alert prompts pill recall

112. DAINIPPON PHARMACEUTICAL RECALLING DRUGS

113. Osaka drug company starts recalling allergy drug

114. HOKURIKU SEIYAKU RECALLS BRITISH DRUG

115. Drug recall puts shadow on approval process; Not so fast: Removal of pain-reliever Duract, other drugs raises procedural questions

116. Dublin Mass will recall drug addicts

117. U.S. firm recalls drug Epinephrine

118. Ben Stiller Recalls Drug Episode

119. Mitsubishi Chemical to recall drugs after fragment found

120. CHINA-NARCOTICS: ANTI-DRUG CAMPAIGN RECALLS THE OPIUM WAR

121. Health Canada recalls heart drug Lanoxin

122. Copley recalls allergy drug Brompheril

123. 3M Recalls Migraine Drug

124. 2 Top Diet Drugs Are Recalled Amid Reports of Heart Defects

125. FDA ORDERS EMERGENCY RECALL OF DRUG

126. Health Canada recalls heart drug

127. HEART DRUG RECALLED

128. Kyowa Pharmaceutical recalling Italian -made drug

129. SUMITOMO PHARMACEUTICALS RECALLS ANTISHOCK DRUG

130. Blood-clotting drug recalled

131. Food and Drug Administration announces voluntary recall of frozen mamey

132. With ban, diet-drug users go cold turkey

133. Dainippon to recall drugs with possible 'mad cow' link

134. ASTHMA DRUG RECALL

135. Blue Cross Warns Of Drug Recall

136. Bayer Yakuhin recalling mislabeled ethical drug

137. DRUG RECALL ALARMS SOME WITH ASTHMA

138. TEVA SHARES SUSPENDED IN US ON PRODUCT RECALL

139. HIV test drug recalled

140. FDA DRUG RECALLS RAISE CONCERNS ABOUT SAFETY / A SENATOR WANTS TO KNOW WHETHER THE AGENCY IS APPROVING RISKY MEDICINE UNDER POLITICAL PRESSURE.

141. FIRM RECALLS GENERIC ASTHMA DRUG

142. New drug's debut could set off diet craze redux

143. COMPANY NEWS; RECALL OF DRUG SENDS COPLEY SHARES DOWN 11%

144. More Setbacks for Bolar

145. RECALL OF 2 DIET DRUGS TO HIT WYETH-AYERST / IT FACES MILLIONS IN LOST SALES AND LITIGATION. BUT ANALYSTS DOWNPLAY THE EFFECTS ON THE ST. DAVIDS COMPANY AND ITS CORPORATE PARENT.

146. TWO DIET DRUGS TAKEN OFF SHELF; REDUX, 'FEN-PHEN' CAUSE HEART VALVE LEAKAGE, FDA SAYS

147. FDA Announces Drug Recall

148. New Diet Drug Coming Next week BY JOHN HENDREN AP Business Writer

149. New drug's debut could set off diet craze redux

150. DEATHS SPUR DRUG RECALL

151. Biocraft Ordered to Stop Making Five Products

152. Painkiller Duract recalled after transplants, 4 deaths

153. Company: Law Favors Diet Drug Maker

154. Diet drug goes on sale this week

155. CONGRESS TARGETING DATE-RAPE DRUG USE; TEEN RECALLS TRAGEDY AS WARNING TO OTHERS

156. Allergy drug recalled UK NEWS DIGEST:

157. Clotting drug being recalled

158. New Diet Drug Hitting Market

159. 62 generic drugs made by PBI

160. MAKERS OF MERIDIA RELEASING IT WITH A DOSE OF CAUTION.; NEW DIET DRUG ON DECK

161. Feds Expand Probe of Copley Drug Recalls

162. Wyeth-Ayerst Recalls Redux And Pondimin

163. Drug dealer's widow recalls raids The Police Royal Commission

164. Sales of Other Diet Drugs Take Hit

165. MIX-UP FORCES PRESCRIPTION DRUG RECALL

166. Anti-Obesity Drug Hits Market

167. Diet-drug users stop cold turkey

168. Health food supplement cited in 14 U.S. deaths, group says

169. CRITICS CONSIDER NEW PRESSURE'S EFFECT ON FDA / THE AGENCY'S RECORD PACE FOR DRUG APPROVALS AND RECALLS MAY LEAD TO CONGRESSIONAL HEARINGS INTO ITS SCREENING PROCESS.

170. New diet drug debuts; First to hit market since 'fen-phen' recalled

171. Diet-drug users going cold turkey

172. Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Earnings Rise 19.5 Percent in Third Quarter

173. MAJOR DRUG COMPANY RECALLS SYRUP BATCH

174. Diet Drug Maker Buried in Suits Company Expects to Beat Cascade of Class Actions

175. Green Cross to post interim group loss on drug recall

176. MPPs support hospital fight

177. New Diet Drug Coming Next week BY JOHN HENDREN AP Business Writer

178. Profit Up 13 Percent

179. RETRANSMITTING to fix category coding Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Earnings Rise 19.

180. Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Earnings Rise 19.5 Percent in Third Quarter

181. Hospital Group Stops Buying From Lyphomed

182. Taiwan drug recall system now in place

183. Negligence charges against ministry officials mulled

184. Hong Kong recalls anti-fever drug that turns into jelly

185. Give & Take; Recall of Diet Drug Will Trim MIT 's Royalties

186. SUMITOMO PHARMACEUTICAL CO. : Herpes Drug Is Recalled Because of Contamination

187. New drug's debut could set off diet craze redux

188. Profit Up 13 Percent

189. Drug Company Recalls of 22 Products

190. Government Charges Company With Making Defective Drugs

191. Drug for bronchial asthma sufferers recalled

192. Generic asthma drug blamed for illnesses; Hundreds sue pharmaceutical company

193. Teva : Antibiotic recalled prior to FDA warning

194. Japanese firm starts to recall defective German HIV test drug

195. State wants to regulate 'date-rape' drug

196. Abbott asks providers to return recalled antibiotic for credit

197. PANEL BACKS IMPORT OF ANTI-INFECTION DRUG

198. Workers say drug-maker ignored warning

199. Doxycycline Recalled

200. AM-Atlantic-Today, ; hqq; HALIFAX OUT; UNDATED - 416 . . . Society.; Dartmouth water rates set to rise




Warner Lambert Recalls Eight Drugs
The Associated Press
December 21, 1992, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 205 words
Dateline: MORRIS PLAINS, N.J.
Body




Warner-Lambert Co. on Monday said it recalled eight drugs because they did not meet certain manufacturing guidelines set by the Food and Drug Administration.
The recall is not safety related, but stems from the validation process for the company's two plants in Puerto Rico where the drugs are manufactured, Warner-Lambert spokesman Peter Wolf said.
"Patients don't have to return the drugs," he said, noting the recall affects mainly wholesalers, chain warehouses and a small number of retail pharmacies.
The company recalled Centrex, an anxiety medication; Ergostat, an anti-migraine medication; Estrovis, an estrogen replacement; Norlestrin, an oral contraceptive; Norlutin, a progestogen; Pyridium, also a progestogen; Norlutate, a urinary analgesic, and Tedral, an asthma medicine.
Wolf said the company's process for making the drugs must be revalidated by the federal regulatory agency. He was unsure when the drugs will be reintroduced, but said the recall was not expected to have a major impact on the company's finances.
FDA spokesman Mike Shaffer said he was unfamiliar with the details of the Warner-Lambert case.
Warner-Lambert is a worldwide company that develops, manufactures and markets health care and consumer products.

 

End of Document


DRUG RECALL
USA TODAY
June 3, 1996, Monday,
INTERNATIONAL EDITION

 Copyright 1996 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;; NATIONLINE
Length: 221 words
Body




A drug company has recalled more than 1,100 cases of an asthma
inhalant in 24 states, saying the vials may contain a pneumonia-causing
organism. Xactdose Inc. in South Beloit, Ill., said it has received
no reports of anyone falling ill from inhaling its albuterol sulfate
solution.
ALSO . . .
-- BUNDLE OF JOY: A 22-year-old heart transplant recipient who
got pregnant against her doctors' advice has given birth to a
daughter. Tarina Roberts, of Columbus, Ohio, gave birth by Caesarean
section last week to 6-pound Keana Jo Chapman. Both mother and
baby were in good condition, a hospital spokesman said.
DEATHS . . .
-- LOS ANGELES: Timothy Leary, 75, the foremost prophet and proselytizer
of LSD and other psychedelia, died. He was working on a book about
dying when he succumbed to prostate cancer. Leary splashed into
the American consciousness in the 1960s with his advice to thousands
of young Americans: "turn on, tune in and drop out."
-- LONDON: Jeremy Sinden, 45, actor best-known for playing the
pompous Englishman, died.
-- LAUSANNE, Switzerland: Francois Genoud, 81, Nazi sympathizer
and defender of terrorists, died.
-- NEW DELHI, India: Neelam Sanjiva Reddy, 83, India's former
president, died.
-- LONG BEACH, Calif.: George Francis Temple Jr., 77, ex-pro
wrestler and brother of Shirley Temple Black, died.
Compiled by Ketrina W. Hoskin
 Graphic



 
PHOTO, B/W, AP; Leary: From Harvard prof to outlaw
 Load-Date: June 3, 1996

 

End of Document


Firms recall drug with potentially fatal side effects
Japan Economic Newswire
OCTOBER 29, 1996, TUESDAY

 Copyright 1996 Kyodo News Service
Length: 222 words
Dateline: TOKYO, Oct. 29 Kyodo
Body




Seven Japanese pharmaceutical companies Tuesday jointly announced a voluntary recall of products containing the muscle relaxant chlormezanone, which has been blamed for eight deaths in France and at least two in Japan.
The companies also said they have halted their marketing of products containing chlormezanone, which is prescribed for shoulder and back pain, osteoarthritis of the spine and various nervous disorders.
From January 1988 to May 1995, French medical authorities detected 18 cases in which the drug had serious side effects for patients, among which eight cases proved fatal.
At least two people are reported to have died in Japan since 1980 from the side effects of the drug, which include toxic epidermal necrosis characterized by blisters and inflammation.
The drug is marketed in Japan under the name Chlormezanone by both Tsuruhara Pharmaceutical Co. and Isei Co.
It is also sold as Relizon by Mochida Pharmaceutical Co., Myolespen by Kaken Pharmaceutical Co., Transanate by Teikoku Hormone Manufacturing Co., Alemital by Zensei Pharmaceutical Industries Co. and Trancopal by Daiichi Pharmaceutical Co.
The seven companies, among which Daiichi Pharmaceutical Co. has by far the largest market share for chlormezanone, plan to recall a total of over 6 million tablets containing the drug.
 Load-Date: October 29, 1996

 

End of Document


14 dead, government recalls drug
Report From Japan
November 26, 1993

 Copyright 1993 Report From Japan, Inc. (A Yomiuri News Service)
Section: Business
Length: 569 words
Highlight: 14 died in September and October after being prescribed newly approved shingles medicine while also taking medicine for cancer treatment.
Body




Doctor-prescribed use of a new government-approved anti-viral drug for shingles caused 14 deaths in September and October among patients already using an established anticancer drug, the Health and Welfare Ministry reported.
The ministry's Central Pharmaceutical Affairs Council has confirmed 21 cases of severe side effects, including those resulting in the 14 deaths, caused by the combined use of fluorouracil anticancer drugs and Sorivudine, a virucide developed by Osaka-based Nippon Shoji Kaisha Ltd.
On Oct. 12 of this year, the company suspended the distribution of Sorivudine when the ministry issued a warning against the serious adverse side effects of the drug when combined with fluorouracil.
The company began recalling Sorivudine in early November, and a spokesman said most of the product was now off the market.
After reporting the 14 deaths on Nov. 24, the ministry acted to instruct Nippon Shoji Kaisha to maintain its distribution suspension and pull the drug off of shelves.
The ministry also decided to improve the format of medication-label warnings to make pharmaceutical companies attach more explicit warnings.
On Sept. 3 of this year, Nippon Shoji Kaisha began marketing Sorivudine under the trade name Usevir, for the treatment of shingles, a painful condition that causes blisters along the paths of nerves and is caused by the chicken pox virus.
About a month after the drug's introduction, the ministry had received 23 reports of adverse side effects believed to have been caused by the drug. But the ministry disregarded two reported cases, including one that had resulted in a patient's death, saying the timing of the administration of the anticancer drugs was unclear.
The remaining 21 cases, which the ministry has since confirmed as adverse side effects due to the combined administration of Sorivudine and the anticancer drug fluorouracil, were all reported before the ministry issued emergency warnings on the administration of the shingles treatment.
The 21 cases involve nine men and 12 women, all outpatients, aged from 51 to 81 years old. Of the total of 23 cases reported, seven patients have since recovered. The ministry has withheld specific information on those killed by the drug mix.
Many experts have warned of the risks of patients receiving treatment for the two diseases at different hospitals. But the ministry has learned that six patients were treated with both fluorouracil and Sorivudine at the same hospital. Three patients, of whom two are now dead, were treated by the same doctor, the ministry said.
Many doctors admitted they had not considered the dangers of combined use of the two drugs, while others said they underestimated the side effects, believing them to be comparable to other ill effects inherent in the administration of anticancer drugs.
During clinical testing of Sorivudine, results revealed that combined treatment with fluorouracil caused an acute decline in white blood cells.
Nippon Shoji Kaisha attached a label warning doctors to avoid joint administration with the anticancer drug, but some experts say the warning failed to convey the seriousness of the side effects.
Nippon Shoji Kaisha President Koichi Hattori apologized for the error, adding that his company would respond to the demands of bereaved families, patients and medical institutions with "utmost sincerity."
 Load-Date: November 26, 1993

 

End of Document


Company Recalling Cough Drug
The Associated Press
October 15, 1990, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1990 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 260 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A drug company is recalling three lots of a bronchodialator drug product that may have been packaged in mislabeled cartons, the Food and Drug Administration said Monday.
The product is Metaproterenol Sulfate Inhalation Solution, USP 5 percent.
Some bottles of the product may have been packaged in an outer folding carton labeled Carbinoxamine Compound Drops, which is used to treat cough and upper respiratory symptoms associated with allergy or colds in children.
The FDA advised parents who have been prescribed Carbinoxamine Compound Drops that the correct medication is purple in color with a grape flavor and grape odor. It uses a dropper with four distinct graduation lines between 1/8 and 1 milliliter.
The inhalation solution is pale yellow and its dropper shows measuring lines at 0.2 milliliter and 0.3 milliliter.
If used as pediatric drops in infants, the inhalation solution could cause nervousness, excessively rapid heartbeat, tremor and nausea. It also could cause hypertension, palpitation, vomiting and bad taste.
Both products are made by Pharmaceutical Basics Inc. of Morton Grove, Ill, which issued the recalled in cooperation with the FDA.
The FDA also recommended that pharmacists review their records since February and notify any patient who had been given either of the products so they could examine the medications and their labels.
The recalled lots of Metaproterenol Sulfate Inhalation Solution, USP 5 percent, are numbers 18222K, 18421H and 18421C. Packages of Carbinoxamine Compound Drops with the same lot numbers also are being recalled.

 

End of Document


Diet drug recall hits 'innocent' drugs as dieters go cold turkey
September 30, 1997, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 786 words
Byline: By JOHN HENDREN, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




After a year of popping "fen-phen" and Redux, Wendy Block is pounding pavement and shedding pounds the old-fashioned way.
"There is no magic pill," said Ms. Block, 58, of Wilmington, N.C., who went from 163 pounds to 143 since quitting the diet pills and moving into the Structure House clinic in nearby Durham last month. "The magic is getting away from the table and getting some exercise."
Since the recall of the diet drugs Redux and fenfluramine - one half of the fen-phen drug cocktail - many of the 6 million patients who used them for a quick weight-loss fix have quit cold turkey. The effects of the diet drug scare have gone beyond Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories, which made the recalled drugs, and is cutting into sales of another obesity pill, phentermine - the still-legal half of fen-phen.
The number of new phentermine prescriptions dropped nearly 10 percent in the week ended Sept. 19, from 105,800 the previous week to 96,044, according to IMS America Ltd., a drug industry research firm in Plymouth Meeting, Pa. That's less than half the peak level of 209,154, reached the week ended April 18.
And those are just new prescriptions.
Total prescriptions of phentermine have plunged from a weekly peak in April of 258,983 to 123,868 the week American Home Products' Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories division recalled Redux and fenfluramine, trade-named Pondimin. The company pulled the drugs off the market at the Food and Drug Administration's request after a Mayo Clinic study linked the drugs to apparent heart valve damage.
Some doctors say the scare over obesity nostrums has a healthy side-effect: driving patients away from weight-loss remedies that imperil their health for what even drug makers concede is a temporary fix.
"What I'm hoping happens is people say, 'Hey I'm going to have to do this myself,"' said Structure House Director Dr. Gerard J. Musante, a psychologist. "If that point can come out of all this, then perhaps some of the concerns coming out of this would be worth it."
For dieters like Teresa Smallwood, health concerns act as a deterrent against any appetite suppressant.
After giving up on an herbal diet aid - "It made me sick" - she signed up at a Chicago-area Jenny Craig diet center. The chain replaced its offering of diet pills with a more traditional weight loss regimen shortly before the drugs were recalled.
"It's healthier," she said of her diet and exercise routine. "I feel better than I have in a very long time health-wise. I've already told all my friends not to try diet drugs."
Many diet centers and doctors are still using phentermine, curbing its side-effects with drugs other than fenfluramine. The Nutri/System diet chain is using the anti-depressant Prozac, while some doctors use the antidepressants Zoloft and Paxil.
And health stores such as General Nutrition Center report increased sales of herbal remedies, such as St. John's Wort, which contains a chemical similar to the depression drugs. The FDA is considering a ban on "herbal fen-phen" and other weight-loss supplements that contain ephedrine, saying they too may be dangerous.
Phentermine maker Medeva PLC isn't idly watching the erosion of its market share.
The British company's Westport, Conn.-based American subsidiary is offering $ 10 discounts on the first month's prescription, which costs approximately $ 40. It recently wrote about 200,000 doctors and 50,000 pharmacists to clarify that the drug was not among those recalled. A company spokeswoman in London declined to attribute the move to slackened sales.
"We felt it prudent in the circumstances just to clarify to doctors that phentermine was not pulled from the market," said the spokeswoman, who spoke on condition of anonymity. "The first priority has to be that physicians know the facts about phentermine."
As phentermine sales suffer, American Home Products has given up the $ 400 million in annual earnings on its obesity drugs due to the recall.
Total prescriptions of its fenfluramine, trade-named Pondimin, dropped from 35,534 for the seven days ended Sept. 12 to 10,410 the week ended Sept. 19 - well off their weekly peak of 153,786 in February. Sales for the final week all occurred in the two days before the recall took effect Sept. 15.
Total prescriptions of the chemically related drug Redux, or dexfenfluramine, fell to 8,482 in the final week, from 30,559 the previous week and an all-time weekly high of 90,474 in February.
Sales went to zero for both drugs after the recall, and that's not likely to change, said J.R. Stafford, chairman and chief executive officer of American Home Products.
Even if studies clear the drugs of causing heart valve damage, he said Monday, "we have no plans to reintroduce the products to the market."
 Load-Date: September 30, 1997

 

End of Document


Recall of drug finds counterfeit
Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)
June 1, 1996 Saturday Final Edition

 Copyright 1996 Metroland Media Group Ltd
Section: BURLINGTON; Pg. T4; News
Length: 226 words
Body




Small numbers of counterfeit medication used to treat endometriosis have been found across Ontario and Quebec, says the Oakville firm whose label and bottles were copied.
Anne Tomalin, Searle Canada Limited spokesperson, said a recall of all Synarel medication has found most of it is the real thing, but some counterfeit medication was returned from Quebec.
Searle recalled Synarel two weeks ago after a complaint from a Toronto pharmacist, whose patient felt the medication wasn't working. A check found the prescription to be simply a solution used to treat nasal drip brought on by hay fever.
Someone got similar bottles, and had similar labels and packages made, and sold it to pharmacists. The nasal spray would cost little to the culprits, but the medication is sold to pharmacists for about $300. Synarel costs consumers about $350.
Ms Tomalin would not be specific, but said small numbers of the counterfeit product have been found. An investigation by Searle, the Health Protection Branch of Health Canada, and RCMP, is ongoing, with no details being made public.
The discovery has left Searle and some members of the pharmaceutical industry shaken, said Ms Tomalin.
"How could anybody do this? This is unheard of."
She said reaction in the industry has been one of disbelief, that someone would substitute a nasal spray for a serious medical prescription.
 Load-Date: October 13, 2002

 

End of Document


Doctors fail drug recall
The Sunday News (Auckland)
April 26, 1998

 Copyright 1998 Independent News Auckland Ltd.
Section: FEATURES; HEALTH;
Length: 395 words
Byline: TYLER Vicky
Body




ONLY a quarter of New Zealand doctors have responded to an urgent drug recall.
The Ministry of Health recalled a batch of the anti-nausea drug Valoid after an unregistered morphine-based drug was discovered in one box.
But while all wholesalers and 91 percent of pharmacists responded to the recall, only 25 percent of doctors returned their recall letters.
The drug is manufactured by Glaxo Wellcome, and medical director Ian Griffiths said the disappointing return rate was heightened when one letter was returned as "unsolicited" despite having large red type "urgent product recall" on the envelope, and another requesting money for completing the recall form.
Griffiths wrote a letter to the New Zealand Medical Journal saying it was important for patient safety that the letters were acted on.
The Ministry of Health was also disappointed with the lack of response from doctors.
Medicine compliance team leader Peter Pratt said product recalls were conducted because of concern that a product on the market may put patients at risk.
"But neither the Ministry of Health nor the company conducting a product recall can force doctors to respond to a recall and take the necessary steps to protect patient safety," he said.
Pratt said the ministry had reminded doctors in the past of the importance of responding to recall requests.
"It is clearly the medical practitioner's responsibility to ensure that the recall letter is opened and acted on and that any risk to the public is removed.
"Should a doctor fail to meet these responsibilities it is likely that the doctor would have failed to meet his or her requirements to provide a service of acceptance quality and would be totally liable for the consequences of his or her actions."
Medical Association chairperson Dr Anton Wiles said it was likely doctors did not respond to the recall because they did not have any Valoid.
"A lot of people won't respond if they don't have it. In my own surgery we don't have it."
He said accidently giving Cyclimorph - a similar drug which contains morphine - to respiratory patients instead of Valoid could be potentially fatal.
"It could cause problems with their breathing."
"You certainly wouldn't want to be confusing those two. They are totally different drugs."
Wiles said doctors needed to ensure they were using the correct drugs at all times, and needed to take notice of drug recalls.
 Load-Date: May 1, 1998

 

End of Document


FDA Recalls Drug Because of Mislabeled Bottles
The Associated Press
March 30, 1990, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1990 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 697 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Food and Drug Administration is recalling two lots of an antidepressant drug called desipramine because some bottles may contain a blood-thinner that could cause serious bleeding, officials say.
The manufacturer, Pharmaceutical Basics Inc. of Denver, told the FDA it was calling back the products after distributor H.L. Moore of New Britain, Conn., found a mislabeled bottle of the drug earlier this week.
The bottle was labeled as containing 25 milligrams of desipramine, but it actually contained 5 milligram tablets of warfarin, a blood-thinner.
The FDA said people taking the antidepressant should examine their tablets to see if any are marked with the name warfarin.
Warfarin is a non-coated pink tablet with "5" on one side and "832" and the word "warfarin" on the other side.
Desipramine is a coated, lavender tablet with the numbers "832" and G254" imprinted on it.
Pharmaceutical Basics is notifying Moore's 350 customers by phone of the possible label mix-up, the FDA said Thursday.
The recall applies only to desipramine made by Pharmaceutical Basics for distribution by Moore. About six other manufacturers make desipramine.
---
 
 Bill Would Teach Parents To Care For Their Babies
WASHINGTON (AP) - A proposed bill would teach parents prenatal care and ways to develop their babies' coordination, memory, language and social skills.
"We know that parental involvement in the education of their children is the key to long-term gains for youngsters," Sen. Christopher Bond, R-Mo., said Thursday. "Parents are their child's first and most influential teachers."
Bond was joined in introducing the bill by Sen. Thad Cochran, R-Miss., and Sen. Howell Heflin, D-Ala.
The bill would create a national "Parents As Teachers" program based on a Missouri model. A five-year, $$100 million competitive grant program would be set up for states to begin or expand Parents As Teachers.
The program, which operates in 26 states, employs home visits, group meetings, videotapes and written material to teach new and prospective parents the skills of raising an infant. There also are periodic health screenings of children.
Bond said the average operating cost for a Parents As Teachers program in a school district is about $$20,000 per year. He estimated that about 1,000 school districts nationwide could participate in the program annually with federal assistance.
The bill would force states to eventually pick up the cost of the program, as federal funding would decline to 75 percent in the third year, 50 percent in the fourth year and 25 percent in the fifth year of the five-year authorization.
---
 
 Report: No One Overseeing Maintenance of Alaskan Oil Pipeline
WASHINGTON (AP) - A government report says no one has been properly overseeing maintenance of the Alaskan oil pipeline to prevent a land spill as disastrous as the ocean spill in Prince William Sound.
But since the Exxon Valdez ran aground and dumped nearly 11 million gallons of crude oil into the Pacific Ocean off Alaska last year, the appropriate agencies are taking notice, said the study released Thursday by the General Accounting Office.
People should remain skeptical, said Rep. George Miller, D-Calif., chairman of the House Interior subcommittee on offshore energy resources.
Miller has been leading a congressional investigation of the March 24, 1989, spill and the safety of other oil industry operations in Alaska.
"The regulators and the regulated have been too cozy," he said of the relationship between the government and the oil industry.
He said it's too early to tell if significant improvement has been made, but various studies under way by the government and the criminal case against Exxon for the spill should lead to improvements.
The GAO said that while several federal and state agencies have authority over the trans-Alaska pipeline system, "the pipeline has not received the systematic, comprehensive oversight needed to ensure compliance with operational safety, emergency response and environmental requirements."
That's particularly worrisome because of recent news that the pipeline is corroding, James Duffus, director of the GAO's division on natural resources management, told Miller's subcommittee.

 

End of Document


Upjohn Recalls Polluted Drug Medicine
 Japan Chemical Week
March 16, 1995

 Copyright 1995 Responsive Database Services, Inc.
All Rights Reserved
Business and Industry
Copyright 1995 Japan Chemical Week
Section: Pg. 4; ISSN: 0047-1755
Length: 215 words
Highlight: Japan Upjohn recalls Soluu-Medrol after the drug was found to be contaminated with unidentified tiny metal particles
Body




The Japanese marketing arm of U.S. pharmaceutical giant Upjohn Co. has recalled its product "Solu-Medrol" after the drug was found to be contaminated with unidentified tiny metal particles.
Japan Upjohn Ltd. informed March 8 by fax all 2,713 medical facilities which have received "Solu-Medrol," an adrenaline cortex hormone that is usually administered through intravenous injection.
The impurities were found in 125 mg bottles of pulverized "Solu-Medrol" that had been produced at an Upjohn factory in Belgium. They belonged to two lots distributed in Japan on January 20 and February 8 that consisted of a total of 199,022 bottles, the company said. The company suspects the unknown substances might be residue from the cleaning of the bottles.
The particles found are between 5 and 250 microns in size, big enough to block fine blood vessels in the worst case, but not life-threatening, according to the company's explanation. So far no complications due to the medicine have been reported.
Since the same bottle-cleaning process is being used in the production of other drugs, including some made in Japan, these products will be screened for impurities too.
"Solu-Medrol" is used to treat states of shock and to suppress the rejection of transplanted kidneys. Its market share in Japan is 34%.
 Load-Date: September 13, 2004

 

End of Document


Company Recalls Blood Pressure Drug
The Associated Press
June 27, 1990, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1990 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 289 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A New York drug company Wednesday began recalling a generic drug used to treat high blood pressure after the Food and Drug Administration alleged the company submitted false information to the agency.
Interpharm Inc. of Plainview, N.Y., agreed to recall all three strengths of clonidine hydrochloride tablets from distributors and pharmacies and to conduct an audit of its 24 other products, the FDA said.
The drug comes in small, round, blue tablets marked "IP 47."
Routine testing by the FDA found that "samples of clonidine hydrochloride 0.3 milligram tablets submitted for bioequivalence testing by Interpharm were not the same as the product on the market," the agency said.
The tablets Interpharm was marketing were blue, and in its application for approval the company told the FDA its tablets were blue. But the pills that were tested for bioequivalence before the drug was approved were peach-colored, the FDA said.
The agency said it found no manufacturing or production data that indicated the company had ever made any peach-colored pills.
The FDA said it had no evidence of a safety problem with the drug Interpharm was marketing, but questions whether the product is therapeutically equivalent to the brand name drug, Catapres, made by Boehringer Ingelheim.
FDA officials advised patients who use the product to consult with their physician about switching to another product.
Interpharm was one of 20 generic drug companies selected for intensified inspections last year in the wake of allegations that several companies had falsified documents and cheated on tests needed to win FDA approval.
The investigation that resulted has produced more than a dozen criminal convictions. More than 100 drugs have been recalled or withdrawn.

 

End of Document


Diet drug recall hits both drug makers and diet chains
September 17, 1997, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 429 words
Body




The decision to pull the drugs Redux and one of the drugs in the popular "fen-phen" combination off the market for health concerns will cost diet chains and drug makers alike in prestige and profits.
But analysts say the hit to American Home Products, the marketer of Redux and the maker of the Pondamin brand of fenfluramine, will be short-term.
American Home Products said this week it expects the decision to cost it $ 200 million to $ 300 million in the third quarter. Deutsche Morgan Grenfell analyst Mariola Haggar expects the company to earn $ 3.36 a share for all of 1997, compared with $ 3.40 without the recall. That amounts to a decline of less than 3 percent.
Analysts at Deutsche Morgan Grenfell and Gruntal & Co., which expects 1997 earnings of $ 3.31 a share, are still urging investors to buy the stocks, despite the uncertainty over the impact of a spate of lawsuits filed by patients who attribute heart and lung problems to the drugs.
Redux and Pondamin churned out sales of $ 132 million and $ 173 million last year, although Pondamin is 24 years old and Redux was introduced halfway through the year. In 1998, sales will drop to zero for Redux developer Interneuron Pharmaceuticals and American Home Products' Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories division.
The effect on diet centers is less certain, but most chains are seeking to transfer patients to other diet remedies.
Diet centers responded quickly when critics called them "pill mills" and patients started asking about the side-effects of diet drugs, with many jettisoning Redux and "fen-phen" before this week's recall at the request of the Food and Drug Administration.
Two weeks before the recall, La Jolla, Calif.-based Jenny Craig took the 700 of its 70,000 customers taking Redux and fen-phen off the drugs.
Jenny Craig now offers no prescription drugs, but many diet chains are replacing fenfluramine with alternatives such as Prozac.
Some have switched to so-called "herbal fen-phen", which use the herbal version of the chemical ephedrine, but a pending FDA proposal would ban such products as unsafe.
Nutri/System has replaced fen-phen with "phen-pro" - Prozac and phentermine.
Bobbie Roscoe heard too many stories about fen-phen to try it. Since May, the 5-foot-4 restaurant worker from Ochoee, Fla., has gone from 180 pounds to 143 on phen-pro.
"You name it, I tried it," said Ms. Roscoe, 42. "I ordered stuff out of magazines, bought everything out of WalMart - Slimfast, Acutrim. … Now I've dropped over 35 pounds. You still have to exercise, drink your water and things like that. It's not all in a pill."
 Load-Date: September 17, 1997

 

End of Document


Blood-clotting drug recalled
September 24, 1997, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 211 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A blood-clotting drug is being recalled because of contamination by an organism that could cause life-threatening infection in people with weakened immune systems, the manufacturer said Wednesday.
Two lots of Amicar Syrup 25% were found during routine testing to contain the organism, Candida parapsilosis, said Immunex Corp., the Seattle-based maker of the drug.
Immunex, which initiated the recall with the Food and Drug Administration, said "the risk of infection is remote" and that infection from the organism is treatable with available medications.
However, the company said patients should return any Amicar Syrup 25% received on or after June 1 to the pharmacy where it was purchased. The recall does not involve tablet or intravenous forms of Amicar, Immunex said.
The recalled lot numbers are 445-578 and 446-877,
The drug, known generically as aminocaproic, is used to help a person's blood to clot.
The recall began last week with notification of distribution centers and pharmacies known to have the product in stock. Immunex also asked pharmacies that have distributed the two affected lots to contact people who may have the product.
Patients with concerns or questions should contact their medical provider or Immunex Professional Services at 1-800-IMMUNEX.
 Load-Date: September 25, 1997

 

End of Document


Diet drug recall hits both drug makers and diet chains
September 17, 1997, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 429 words
Body




The decision to pull the drugs Redux and one of the drugs in the popular "fen-phen" combination off the market for health concerns will cost diet chains and drug makers alike in prestige and profits.
But analysts say the hit to American Home Products, the marketer of Redux and the maker of the Pondamin brand of fenfluramine, will be short-term.
American Home Products said this week it expects the decision to cost it $ 200 million to $ 300 million in the third quarter. Deutsche Morgan Grenfell analyst Mariola Haggar expects the company to earn $ 3.36 a share for all of 1997, compared with $ 3.40 without the recall. That amounts to a decline of less than 3 percent.
Analysts at Deutsche Morgan Grenfell and Gruntal & Co., which expects 1997 earnings of $ 3.31 a share, are still urging investors to buy the stocks, despite the uncertainty over the impact of a spate of lawsuits filed by patients who attribute heart and lung problems to the drugs.
Redux and Pondamin churned out sales of $ 132 million and $ 173 million last year, although Pondamin is 24 years old and Redux was introduced halfway through the year. In 1998, sales will drop to zero for Redux developer Interneuron Pharmaceuticals and American Home Products' Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories division.
The effect on diet centers is less certain, but most chains are seeking to transfer patients to other diet remedies.
Diet centers responded quickly when critics called them "pill mills" and patients started asking about the side-effects of diet drugs, with many jettisoning Redux and "fen-phen" before this week's recall at the request of the Food and Drug Administration.
Two weeks before the recall, La Jolla, Calif.-based Jenny Craig took the 700 of its 70,000 customers taking Redux and fen-phen off the drugs.
Jenny Craig now offers no prescription drugs, but many diet chains are replacing fenfluramine with alternatives such as Prozac.
Some have switched to so-called "herbal fen-phen", which use the herbal version of the chemical ephedrine, but a pending FDA proposal would ban such products as unsafe.
Nutri/System has replaced fen-phen with "phen-pro" - Prozac and phentermine.
Bobbie Roscoe heard too many stories about fen-phen to try it. Since May, the 5-foot-4 restaurant worker from Ochoee, Fla., has gone from 180 pounds to 143 on phen-pro.
"You name it, I tried it," said Ms. Roscoe, 42. "I ordered stuff out of magazines, bought everything out of WalMart - Slimfast, Acutrim. … Now I've dropped over 35 pounds. You still have to exercise, drink your water and things like that. It's not all in a pill."
 Load-Date: September 18, 1997

 

End of Document


Blood-Clotting Drug Recalled
Associated Press Online
September 24, 1997; Wednesday 20:33 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington - general news
Length: 225 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A blood-clotting drug is being recalled because of contamination by an organism that could cause life-threatening infection in people with weakened immune systems, the manufacturer said Wednesday.
Two lots of Amicar Syrup 25% were found during routine testing to contain the organism, Candida parapsilosis, said Immunex Corp., the Seattle-based maker of the drug.
Immunex, which initiated the recall with the Food and Drug Administration, said ''the risk of infection is remote'' and that infection from the organism is treatable with available medications.
However, the company said patients should return any Amicar Syrup 25% received on or after June 1 to the pharmacy where it was purchased. The recall does not involve tablet or intravenous forms of Amicar, Immunex said.
The recalled lot numbers are 445-578 and 446-877,
The drug, known generically as aminocaproic, is used to help a person's blood to clot.
The recall began last week with notification of distribution centers and pharmacies known to have the product in stock. Immunex also asked pharmacies that have distributed the two affected lots to contact people who may have the product.
Patients with concerns or questions should contact their medical
rovider or Immunex Professional Services at 1-800-IMMUNEX.
   (PROFILE
   (CO:Immunex Corp; TS:IMNX; IG:MTC;)
   (CAT:Business;)
   (CAT:Medical;)
   )
 Load-Date: September 24, 1997

 

End of Document


Diet Recall Hits Drug Makers
Associated Press Online
September 17, 1997; Wednesday 15:46 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Financial pages
Length: 471 words
Byline: The Associated Press 
Body




The decision to pull the drugs Redux and one of the drugs in the popular ''fen-phen'' combination off the market for health concerns will cost diet chains and drug makers alike in prestige and profits.
But analysts say the hit to American Home Products, the marketer of Redux and the maker of the Pondamin brand of fenfluramine, will be short-term.
American Home Products said this week it expects the decision to cost it $200 million to $300 million in the third quarter. Deutsche Morgan Grenfell analyst Mariola Haggar expects the company to earn $3.36 a share for all of 1997, compared with $3.40 without the recall. That amounts to a decline of less than 3 percent.
Analysts at Deutsche Morgan Grenfell and Gruntal & Co., which expects 1997 earnings of $3.31 a share, are still urging investors to buy the stocks, despite the uncertainty over the impact of a spate of lawsuits filed by patients who attribute heart and lung problems to the drugs.
Redux and Pondamin churned out sales of $132 million and $173 million last year, although Pondamin is 24 years old and Redux was introduced halfway through the year. In 1998, sales will drop to zero for Redux developer Interneuron Pharmaceuticals and American Home Products' Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories division.
The effect on diet centers is less certain, but most chains are seeking to transfer patients to other diet remedies.
Diet centers responded quickly when critics called them ''pill mills'' and patients started asking about the side-effects of diet drugs, with many jettisoning Redux and ''fen-phen'' before this week's recall at the request of the Food and Drug Administration.
Two weeks before the recall, La Jolla, Calif.-based Jenny Craig took the 700 of its 70,000 customers taking Redux and fen-phen off the drugs.
Jenny Craig now offers no prescription drugs, but many diet chains are replacing fenfluramine with alternatives such as Prozac.
Some have switched to so-called ''herbal fen-phen'', which use the herbal version of the chemical ephedrine, but a pending FDA proposal would ban such products as unsafe.
Nutri/System has replaced fen-phen with ''phen-pro'' Prozac and phentermine.
Bobbie Roscoe heard too many stories about fen-phen to try it. Since May, the 5-foot-4 restaurant worker from Ochoee, Fla., has gone from 180 pounds to 143 on phen-pro.
''You name it, I tried it,'' said Ms. Roscoe, 42. ''I ordered stuff out of magazines, bought everything out of WalMart _ Slimfast, Acutrim. … Now I've dropped over 35 pounds. You still have to exercise, drink your water and things like that. It's not all in a pill.''
   (PROFILE
   (CO:American Home Products; TS:AHP; IG:DRG;)
   (CO:Interneuron Pharmaceuticals Inc; TS:IPIC; IG:MTC;)
   (CO:Jenny Craig; TS:JC; IG:HOU;)
   (CO:Wal Mart Stores; TS:WMT; IG:RTB;)
   (CAT:Business;)
   (CAT:Medical;)
   (CAT:Consumer;)
   )
 Load-Date: September 17, 1997

 

End of Document


Epilepsy drug recalled
United Press International
March 14, 1991, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 U.P.I.
Section: Washington News
Length: 408 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A generic drug used to prevent epileptic seizures is being recalled due to concerns over whether it is equivalent to its brand-name counterpart, the Food and Drug Administration announced Thursday.
 FDA officials said the recall of Pharmaceutical Basic Inc.'s version of carbamazepine is being conducted because of ''discrepancies and omissions that have been disovered in records'' the firm submitted to the agency to win drug approval. The FDA would not be more specific about the problems found in the records.
Generic drugs are supposed to be chemically equivalent to brand-name drugs with expired patents.
 For the past three years, the generic drug industry has been mired in a scandal stemming from revelations that company executives bribed FDA officials, and that some firms used deceit to subvert FDA tests and block government investigations.
 Carbamazepine is sold under the brand name Tegretol by Ciba-Geigy Corp., of Summit, N.J. and is made by several other manufacturers. Thursday's recall involves only the version made by PBI, and is not expected to cause any serious shortages of the drug, the FDA said.
 FDA officials added that they are not aware of any serious safety problems with the PBI drug, and advised patients with epilepsy to continue taking their daily dose until they talk with their doctors.
 Although manufacturing and distribution of PBI's version of carbamazepine was halted in January, FDA spokesman Brad Stone said officials think ''a substantial quantity'' of the PBI drug is still on the market because it has a two-year expiration date.
 More than 2 million Americans have epilepsy, and about one patient in 100 suffers from recurring seizures. Although the root of most epilepsy is unknown, the symptoms are caused by brief changes in the brain's electrical system.
 Darryl Johnson, vice president of marketing for PBI, Thursday estimated that 22 million tablets of PBI's version of carbamazepine were still on the market. Johnson had no other comments on the recall.
 PBI distributed carbamazepine under its own name and the following labels: Rugby Laboratories, Lederle Laboratories, Bioline Laboratories, Goldline Laboratories, Drug Guild Distributors' Harbor, h.1. Moore Drug Exchange, Major Pharmaceutical, Parmed Pharmaceutical, Martec Pharmaceutical, Glenlawn Laboratories and Best Generics.
 The tablets are round, white and marked on one side with one of the following designations: 34/15, C/66 or 832/G133.

 

End of Document


JUDGE ORDERS RECALL OF GENERIC DRUGS
Wisconsin State Journal (Madison, WI)
February 6, 1993, Saturday,
ALL EDITIONS

 Copyright 1993 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: Money
Length: 334 words
Dateline: NEWARK, N.J. (AP)
Body




A generic drug manufacturer must recall batches of seven medicines and stop distributing others until the company completes studies of its manufacturing process, a federal judge ruled.
But U.S. District Judge Alfred M. Wolin on Thursday refused a request by federal pharmaceutical regulators to order a temporary shutdown of Barr Laboratories Inc.
Wolin said the company, which has plants in Northvale and in Pomona, N.Y., had improved its compliance with federal food and drug standards since regulators started legal action against it early last year.
But Wolin agreed with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration that five drugs should be recalled. He also ordered Barr to halt distribution of 24 varieties of drugs until the company provided studies of its manufacturing processes. He ordered tests for 15 more products but said the company could continue distributing them.
The FDA had sought to stop Barr from making and selling 15 pharmaceutical products and to force Barr to improve its production of 45 other drugs.
The drugs Wolin ordered recalled were at least three varieties of erythromycin, an antibiotic; and batches from four other drugs, sulfisoxazole acetyl, another antibiotic; meperidine HCL, a pain killer and anesthetic; aspirin with codeine; and hydrocodone bitartrate with APAP, an analgesic. (The following paragraphs were not published.)
Barr President Bruce Downey said the company would comply with the court's orders. Downey emphasized that the recall was not for health and safety reasons. He said the drugs in question did not meet certain federal specifications in the manufacturing process.
No drugs will be recalled immediately. The FDA was ordered to submit recommendations on the type of recall. Wolin will then issue an order on the mechanics of the recall, including whether customers will be asked to bring in their unused portions.
Barr Laboratories stock was down sharply today. In late morning trading on the American Stock Exchange, it was off $ 3.62 1/2 a share at $ 9.25.
 Load-Date: May 17, 1995

 

End of Document


Biocraft Recalls Some Drugs as Part of Government Settlement
The Associated Press
July 29, 1994, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 443 words
Dateline: NEWARK, N.J.
Body




Shares of Biocraft Laboratories Inc. soared 20 percent after the big generic drug manufacturer announced the settlement of a dispute with government regulators over alleged improper manufacturing practices.
Biocraft said it would recall some batches of nine drugs and temporarily stop making and selling five of them, under the agreement filed Thursday in U.S. District Court.
Biocraft shares gained $ 2.50 to $ 14.62 on the New York Stock Exchange after the settlement was revealed Thursday. The stock was down 75 cents to $ 13.87 in early trading Friday. The shares had been falling steadily since early June's peak of $ 17.75 on poor earnings and uncertainty over the government claims.
In the court-approved settlement, the company said it will stop making the widely used antibiotics, heart medication, and others until an outside expert certifies they are being manufactured in accordance with U.S. Food and Drug Administration guidelines.
Biocraft also must have an expert certify all its remaining drugs, following a schedule set forth in the agreement with regulators. If Biocraft does not meet the schedule, or if the FDA rejects any of the certifications, it will have to stop making the drug in question, the U.S. Justice Department said.
The agreement resolves a complaint filed by the Justice Department on July 21 that accused Biocraft of violating federal standards for testing, record-keeping, manufacturing and quality control.
Harold Snyder, Biocraft's president and chief executive officer, said Friday the recall involves only a minute portion of the nine drugs and that all the products are safe.
"This has been blown way out of proportion," an angry Snyder told The Associated Press. He said only a small amount of each of the nine drugs was recalled. "The press release (from the Justice Department) makes it look like we've recalled all our batches of the nine drugs."
A Justice Department spokesman was not immediately available Friday to answer questions regarding the scope of the voluntary recall.
The drug lots being recalled include commonly prescribed antibiotics: liquid amoxicillin for humans and for animals, amoxicillin chewable tablets, cephalexin and liquid ampicillin.
Also to be recalled are lots of disopyramide capsules, a heart medication for angina and rhythm irregularities; liquid nystatin, an anti-fungal for yeast infections; sulfamethoxazole with trimethoprim, another anti-arrhythmic drug, and amiloride, a diruetic that induces urine in order to treat a variety of disorders.
Biocraft must halt production of these drugs: liquid amoxicillin for humans and for animals, liquid ampicillin, amiloride and liquid nystatin.
 Load-Date: July 29, 1994

 

End of Document


Baxter Recalls Drug Product After Autopsy Shows Donor's Rare Disease
The Associated Press
November 22, 1994, Tuesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 212 words
Dateline: DEERFIELD, Ill.
Body




The hospital supply company Baxter International Inc. has begun a worldwide recall of one of its blood products after an autopsy showed a blood donor with a rare, fatal disease.
Only a small amount of the blood product albumin - any lots that might have involved that donor - has been withdrawn, Baxter spokeswoman Jill Carter said.
Albumin is a substance that expands the volume of blood. The drug, sold under the name Buminate 25 Percent Albumen, is used after surgery or for patients who have lost a substantial amount of blood and are suffering from shock, Carter said.
The autopsy of a male donor who died recently showed he had Creutzfelt-Jakob disease, a virus which attacks the central nervous system and causes dementia, wasting of muscles and eventual death.
"There is no blood test for this disease and we couldn't have known about it beforehand," said Carter.
Baxter doesn't know if any of the Buminate was contaminated and is unaware of any case where the disease was transmitted via the blood supply, Carter said.
Transmission of the disease between humans is rare. In most instances, infection has been linked with brain surgery, with contaminated instruments, transplantation of an infected cornea and treatment with growth hormone extracted from pituitary glands.
 Load-Date: November 22, 1994

 

End of Document


HEMOPHILIA DRUG RECALLED
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
OCTOBER 5, 1996 Saturday DCITY EDITION

 Copyright 1996 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved
 
Section: CITY & REGION; Pg. B03
Length: 400 words
Byline: Donna Shaw, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER, The Associated Press contributed to this report.
Body




A King of Prussia blood-products company yesterday announced its third product recall in a week, this time for a hemophilia medicine.
The company, Centeon, said it was recalling 1,600 vials from one lot of Monoclate-P because some of the bottles may have been cracked during manufacturing, possibly after being dropped.
The vials were distributed to 28 health-care providers in May, according to the company. The lot being recalled is P72304, expiring April 12, 1998.
Officials from Centeon and the Food and Drug Administration said the recall was a precaution and that no ill effects had been reported by patients.
"Cracked vials would be at risk for contamination," said Dr. Jay S. Epstein, director of FDA's Office of Blood Research and Review.
Centeon said that if a vial were cracked, it would lose its vacuum and users would notice something wrong.
Hemophiliacs or treatment centers that have the affected blood-clotting medicine were asked to return it to the manufacturer. For questions, call Centeon's customer support center at 1-800-683-1288.
The recall follows two others announced by Centeon in the past week for an albumin product, Albuminar, used in hospitals to treat low blood pressure in burn and shock victims, as well as in dialysis patients. Altogether, 10 lots were recalled, for a total of more than 100,000 vials.
The Albuminar recalls were announced after reports that at least two patients had suffered blood poisoning after being administered the product, according to Centeon. Both patients recovered.
Since then, the FDA has investigated two additional cases of blood poisoning.
The recalled Albuminar lots are: P18607, L8212, M60902, M5412, L58211, M61403, M63204, M54912, P61805 and P61205.
Epstein said all the incidents may be related, in that in each case, the FDA suspects the vials were dropped, allowing germs to enter.
Centeon is a joint venture between Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc., of Collegeville, and Hoechst AG of Germany. The company, formed in January, combined the plasma-products businesses of the German firm and RPR's Armour subsidiary.
Armour is one of four companies being sued by hemophiliacs who in the late 1970s and early 1980s received HIV-tainted blood-clotting medicines. The companies recently offered a $640 million settlement proposal. Affected hemophiliacs have until Oct. 15 to sign up for the deal, worth $100,000 apiece, or to pursue individual lawsuits.
 Load-Date: October 28, 2002

 

End of Document


Top generic drug recalled
United Press International
February 1, 1990, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1990 U.P.I.
Section: Washington News
Length: 414 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A New York company facing allegations it lied to the government to win approval of its product has agreed to recall the nation's best-selling prescription generic drug, the Food and Drug Administration said Thursday.
 FDA officials said Bolar Pharmaceutical Co., of Copiague, N.Y., notified the agency this week of plans to withdraw its version of the blood pressure medication Dyazide.
 The FDA started efforts to pull the Bolar medication off the market in November, saying the generic drug was not therapeutically equivalent to the brand-name product. The action came amidst revelations that Bolar allegedly switched drug samples submitted for approval tests.
About 500,000 people with high blood pressure currently take Bolar's version of Dyazide. FDA officials warned patients on the medication not to suddenly stop taking the drug, but to finish their prescription and consult a doctor about what medication they should take in its place.
 Brand-name Dyazide, made by SmithKline Beecham, costs about 50 percent more than the generic version.
 ''The news of this recall could send some people into a panic,'' John McHugh, a drug expert with the American Association of Retired Persons, told the Wall Street Journal.
 Bolar, which has been the target of a criminal investigation by the Justice Department for nearly six months, has repeatedly denied any wrongdoing and rebuffed previous FDA efforts to force a recall.
 But in a statement issued Wednesday, Bolar said it has decided to stop making the blood pressure medication -- the nation's most prescribed generic drug -- and to recall existing supplies.
 Bolar said it was taking the action because the drug's ''bioequivalence cannot be assure in light of serious questions concerning the accuracy and reliability of the documentation supporting the approval.''
 Generic drugs are supposed to be chemically equivalent to brand-name drugs whose patents have expired.
 In addition to the blood pressure medication, Bolar announced Wednesday that it is recalling its version of a little-used anti-epileptic drug called Dilantin. Production of that drug was stopped last year.
 Bolar said the two medications recalled this week, along with a generic antibiotic it pulled off the market in October, accounted for 47 percent of its 1989 sales of $133 million.
 The FDA's generic drug division is currently confronting a scandal stemming from the bribery convictions of three FDA employees, and revelations of widespread wrongdoing in the industry.

 

End of Document


BIOCRAFT TO RECALL 9 DRUGS; SETTLES OUT OF COURT WITH GOVERNMENT
Dayton Daily News (Ohio)
July 30, 1994 SATURDAY,
CITY EDITION

 Copyright 1994 The Dayton Daily News
Section: NEWS,
Length: 303 words
Byline: ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: NEWARK, N.J.
Body




One of the nation's largest manufacturers of generic drugs, Biocraft Laboratories Inc., has agreed to recall batches of nine drugs and immediately stop making and selling five of them.
In the court-approved settlement, the company will stop making the drugs - widely used antibiotics, heart medication and others - until an outside expert certifies they are being manufactured in accordance with U.S. Food and Drug Administration guidelines.
Biocraft also must have an expert certify all its remaining drugs, following a schedule set forth in the consent decree. If Biocraft does not meet the schedule, or if the FDA rejects any of the certifications, it will have to stop making the drug in question, the U.S. Justice Department said.
The Justice Department had accused Biocraft of violating federal standards for testing, record-keeping, manufacturing and quality control.
The drug lots being recalled include commonly prescribed antibiotics: liquid amoxicillin for humans and for animals, amoxicillin chewable tablets, cephalexin and liquid ampicillin.
Also to be recalled are lots of disopyramide capsules, a heart medication for angina and rhythm irregularities; liquid nystatin, an anti-fungal for yeast infections; sulfamethoxazole with trimethoprim, another anti-arrhythmic drug and the diuretic amiloride.
Biocraft must halt production of these drugs: liquid amoxicillin for humans and for animals, liquid ampicillin, amiloride and liquid nystatin.
Harold Snyder, Biocraft's president and chief executive officer, said Friday that the recall involves only a minute portion of the nine drugs and that the products - including the five drugs the company has stopped making and selling - are all safe.
Biocraft shares jumped $ 2.50 to $ 14.62 1/2 on the New York Stock Exchange after the settlement was revealed Thursday.
 Load-Date: September 1, 1994

 

End of Document


Kidney drug recalled
The Age (Melbourne, Australia)
February 11, 1998 Wednesday
Late Edition

 Copyright 1998 The Age Company Limited All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3
Length: 290 words
Byline: STEPHEN CAUCHI
Body




Fear of mad cow disease has sparked a national and worldwide recall of a kidney transplant medication.
A total of 62,284 phials of Atgam, a sterile solution used to treat recipients of transplanted kidneys, were produced using the blood cells of a donor who had Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD).
CJD is the human equivalent of mad cow disease, which causes death by decaying the brain.
Mr Dennis Feeney, a director with the Australian arm of Atgam manufacturer Pharmacia-Upjohn, said the Australian company had received 1018 phials of the contaminated solution, of which 830 had been distributed to hospitals, he said.
He said that because a kidney transplant patient might use many phials of Atgam, it was hard to tell how many patients had been affected.
Mr Feeney said that the risk of getting CJD from the contaminated Afgam was "slight to the point of theoretical" and that no one had contracted CJD through blood transfusion.
Atgam is produced in horses and must go through purification steps, including being filtered through the cell walls of human red blood cells.
In the case of the contaminated phials, the Atgam was filtered through the cells of a donor found to have CJD.
Pharmacia-Upjohn, a Swedish-American pharmaceutical group, announced in Stockholm on Monday it was pulling Atgam from shelves in Australia, Chile, Denmark, Finland, Hong Kong, New Zealand, Norway, Puerto Rico, Singapore, South Africa, South Korea, the United States and Venezuela.
It said 40,358 phials had already been pulled from shelves worldwide, but about 21,000 had already been used.
The company admitted there was a risk of contracting CJD through the product but said the risk was "extremely small".
The company was alerted by health authorities in Hong Kong.
 Load-Date: July 25, 2007

 

End of Document


Japan recalls faulty AIDS test drug
United Press International
October 23, 1994, Sunday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 U.P.I.
Section: International
Length: 441 words
Byline: BY RICHARD GROSS
Dateline: TOKYO, Oct. 23
Body




The Japanese distributor for the German drug company Hoechst Ltd. has withdrawn from the market a faulty drug widely used in AIDS testing, Japan's largest daily newspaper reported Sunday.  It was decided in Germany to recall the drug Enzygnost after a known HIV-positive patient tested negative using the drug, The Yomuiri Shimbun reported. Germany's serum and vaccine research institute temporarily withdrew approval of the drug and ordered its recall by Hoechst Ltd.  ''We may have to ask those tested negative with this drug to test again,'' said Hiroshi Inaba, head of the AIDS, tuberculosis and infectious disease section of Japan's Health and Welfare ministry.  ''Right now, we are trying to determine how accurate the tests were.'' Hoechst Japan Ltd. notified 50 Japanese medical facilities which use the drug of the recall on Thursday, but nearly 80 percent of the Enzygnost distributed last year -- enough to test 150,000 people -- has been used.  Hoechst Ltd. ordered the recall in 34 other nations Tuesday. Hoechst Japan Ltd. began the recall in this country Thursday after officially notifying the Health and Welfare Ministry.  Two methods are used to screen for HIV: the enzyme-antibody test and gelatin agglutination. Testing for enzyme antibodies is now more common. Enzygnost has been a popular test agent because it was believed to be highly sensitive in locating antibodies related to HIV.  In Japan, the drug was used in 40 percent of the enzyme-antibody tests performed until Thursday's recall order.  Japan has experienced an increase in the number of HIV-positive patients over the past several years.
About 100,000 people in Japan are now tested annually for the virus. Japan's AIDS Surveillance Committee reported the number of HIV-positive and AIDS cases combined stood at 3, 481 on August 31.  Seeking to control spread of the virus, Japan now provides free HIV testing. The number seeking those tests increased from 11,000 in 1991 to 110,000 last year.  In a related story, another Japanese newspaper, the Mainichi Shimbun, reported Sunday that it has obtained evidence which proves Japan's Health and Welfare Ministry concealed information that drug companies in Japan returned to the United States a blood product contaminated with HIV.  The paper said evidence for the claim came in a prepared statement supplied by the ministry Oct. 4 in response to a damage suit brought by a group of AIDS patients. The group, mostly hemophiliacs, filed the suit against the government and two drug companies in Tokyo District Court.  The drug companies are U.S. health products maker Baxter Ltd. and Baxter Yakuhin Ltd, its Japan arm.
 Load-Date: October 24, 1994

 

End of Document


Generic Asthma Drug Recalled
The Associated Press
January 6, 1994, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 452 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER CONNELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A generic drug company is recalling millions of vials of a widely used asthma medication because the solution may be contaminated by microbial organisms.
The company and the Food and Drug Administration said Wednesday the problem with Copley Pharmaceutical's albuterol sulfate inhalation solution could pose serious problems for people with weak immune systems.
That includes those with AIDS, cystic fibrosis or chronic obstructive lung disease and cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy or radiation.
Dr. Mark Jacobson, an AIDS specialist at the University of California at San Francisco, said people with impaired lung functions or immune systems would be at "substantial risk for developing life-threatening pneumonia" if they used contaminated medication.
Albuterol is a bronchodilator medication that Copley sells under its own name and other private brand labels. The company is recalling all lots of its 20-milliliter albuterol sulfate solution in 0.5 percent concentrate form.
The company estimates that its out-of-pocket expenses for the recall will be approximately $ 6 million, said spokesman Steven Tannenbaum.
The solution is mixed in a device called a nebulizer to help clear the airways and ease breathing.
Copley, of Canton, Mass., sells the solution under its own name and these private brand labels: Aligen, Astra, Geneva, Goldline, Harber, Major, Moore, H.L. Moore, Qualitest, Rugby and Schein.
It is a generic version of an albuterol solution sold under the brand name Proventil by Schering-Plough Corp. Proventil is also sold as an inhaler and in other forms. None of the Schering products were contaminated or involved in the recall in any way.
The Food and Drug Administration listed this as a Class I recall, meaning the problem could cause serious health injury or even death. But FDA spokeswoman Susan Cruzan said the agency knew of no one actually harmed by the contamination.
The recall does not involve Copley's 0.083 percent albuterol product.
The Canton, Mass., company, said microbial organisms were found in certain packages of the Albuterol product made in the last three months. The company does not yet know what caused the problem.
Anthony A. Bonelli, the president, said, "We choose to err on the side of caution and rather than just limit the recall to those few lots where the organism was confirmed, we thought it would be in the public's best interest to recall everything that was put out on the market."
The company asked pharmacists to check records going back to Dec. 1, 1991, and notify patients to stop using the product at once and return any unused portions to their pharmacist. It said any of the solution with an expiration date of December 1995 or earlier should be returned.
 Load-Date: January 6, 1994

 

End of Document


CONSUMER ALERT: DRUG RECALL
PR Newswire
November 26, 1991, Tuesday - 17:32 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1991 PR Newswire Association, Inc.
Section: Financial News
Length: 220 words
Dateline: POMONA, N.Y., Nov. 26
Body




Barr Laboratories (AMEX: BRL), a Pomona, N.Y., drug company, today is advising consumers of a drug labeling mix-up which could have serious health consequences for individuals who are allergic to "sulfa drugs." The company said that approximately 335 bottles of a liquid antibiotic labeled as Erythromycin Ethylsuccinate actually contain Erythromycin Ethylsuccinate and Sulfisoxazole Acetyl.
Individuals allergic to sulfa drugs who take the mislabeled drug could have reactions ranging from mild discomfort to, in rare cases, life-threatening respiratory distress.
Barr Laboratories has voluntarily initiated a nationwide recall to the consumer level.  Retail pharmacists are being requested to notify patients of possible mislabeled bottles dispensed.
Patients who have received a prescription from their pharmacy in the past 30 days for liquid Erythromycin Ethylsuccinate should examine the prescription bottle for lot number 1I445AW and the firm name, Barr Laboratories.  Any prescription bottle bearing that lot number should be returned to the dispensing pharmacy for replacement.
Patients who are unable to determine the manufacturer or lot number of their prescription bottle should contact their pharmacist or may call a consumer information line at 800-438-2000.
CONTACT: Harold Cohen, 914-362-2823, for Barr Laboratories

 

End of Document


Recall May Limit Drug-Device Supply
Associated Press Online
May 14, 1998; Thursday 06:21 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic, non-Washington, general news item
Length: 352 words
Dateline: BOSTON
Body




A recall last week has caused extremely short supply of emergency drug-injection devices used by millions who suffer life-threatening allergic reactions, The Boston Globe reported today.
The shortage of replacement EpiPens, self-injecting devices containing the drug epinephrine, worries those who have severe reactions to insect bites or food, the newspaper said.
Meridian Medical Technologies of Columbia, Md., maker of EpiPens, recalled them after learning that 47 lots were not strong enough to stop severe reactions.
Some 10 million Americans are allergic to bee stings, and an additional 5 million are allergic to certain foods. About 1 million per year suffer severe reactions leading to suffocation, shock, swelling and loss of blood pressure.
Meridian, when it recalled the EpiPens, said users could get free replacements at drug stores.
Thomas Handel, executive director of business development for Meridian, told the Globe that the company has increased production to 24 hours a day, seven days a week, but cannot keep up with the demand for replacements.
He said it hopes to meet current replacement orders in two to four weeks and to get a generous supply of the devices to drug stores within four weeks.
The nonprofit Food Allergy Network in Fairfax, Va., said the shortage has caused a deluge of complaints.
''It's caught everyone by surprise. It's left patients in a frenzy and at risk,'' said Anne Munoz-Furlong, founder of the network.
Meridian officials have urged consumers not to use the EpiPens, even with the lack of replacements.
However, Dr. John Costa, a specialist in allergy and immunology at Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston, said recalled EpiPens are better than nothing in emergencies, and he said patients should keep them until replacements are available.
He also suggested sufferers get Ana-Kit devices, made by Bayer Inc. of Spokane, Wash. They inject a drug that fights allergies. But they work more like conventional injection needles, and users need to be trained.
   (PROFILE
   (CO:Meridian Medical Technologies Inc; TS:MTEC; IG:MDS;)
   (CAT:Business;)
   (CAT:Medical;)
   )
 Load-Date: May 14, 1998

 

End of Document


3M Recalls Migraine Drug Lot Due to Nausea, Vomiting
The Associated Press
September 10, 1991, Tuesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1991 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 213 words
Dateline: MAPLEWOOD, Minn.
Body




The 3M Co. has voluntarily recalled one lot of a prescription drug for treating migraine headaches after some customers reported nausea and vomiting.
The recall involves nearly 24,000 units of a hand-held aerosol drug inhaler called Medihaler Ergotamine with Oral Adapter that was distributed in the United States and Australia, said Karyn Goad, a spokeswoman for 3M's pharmaceuticals division.
The affected products carry the lot number 901346, Goad said. A patient who has the product can contact the pharmacy where it was bought or the physician who prescribed it.
The federal Food and Drug Administration said the problem with the recalled inhalers is not life-threatening.
So far, 3M hasn't determined what caused the problem, Goad said. The company manufactures the inhaler in Northridge, Calif.
The company learned about the problem from doctors who reported nausea and vomiting in their patients, she said.
Because all the incidents occurred within a six-week period in May and early June, the company was able to trace the problem to a single lot of manufactured products, a total of 23,766 inhaler units, she said.
In June, 3M asked independent wholesale distributors of the inhaler to disclose the recall to their customers, which are public and hospital pharmacies, Goad said.

 

End of Document


German Company Recalls AIDS Test Drug Worldwide
The Associated Press
October 23, 1994, Sunday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International News
Length: 415 words
Dateline: BERLIN
Body




A German company has recalled a drug used to test for AIDS after it failed to detect the virus in one case, the company said Sunday.
The drug Enzygnost is distributed by Behring, a subsidiary of Hoechst, one of Germany's largest health companies.
Behring spokesman Wolfgang Faust said German pharmaceutical authorities had withdrawn the license for the drug. He said a worldwide recall action to 35 countries began Oct. 15 without any public announcement.
The United States was not on the recall list, Faust said.
In Japan, the Yomiuri newspaper reported Sunday that the Japanese Health and Welfare Ministry was asking for more information so it could decide whether to request further testing for people who tested negative for AIDS with Enzygnost.
Yomiuri said enough of the drug had been sold in Japan for 150,000 tests and 80 percent of it had been used.
Faust said extensive retesting would not be necessary. He said only one problem case had turned up on the drug, which had been in use since 1991.
"There is no reason to panic," he told The Associated Press from Marburg, Behring's base.
Faust said the recall was based on a case in Munich in which a blood donor tested negative in June for HIV, the virus that causes AIDS. The donor was tested again in September and the result was positive.
The June blood sample was then tested with another drug and the result was positive, he said.
Faust said the diagnostic failure was partly explained by the gap between when a person is infected with HIV and when it can be detected in blood, which can be as long as 12 weeks.
But he said Behring had applied already to license an improved AIDS test drug and Enzygnost had become obsolete.
Contaminated blood products are one path for the spread of the deadly virus, as well as sexual intercourse and drug abuse with contaminated needles.
Germany suffered an AIDS scare last fall when it was learned two blood products companies had distributed plasma that had been inadequately tested. The manager of one company and four assistants are on trial charged with attempting to commit bodily injury. Prosecutors say at least three people contracted AIDS from the contaminated blood products.
German health authorities were criticized for reacting slowly to reports that some blood products firms were acting improperly. The government set up a fund to pay compensation to AIDS patients infected by such blood products.
About 1 percent of the 60,000 HIV-infected people in Germany got the virus from blood products.
 Load-Date: October 23, 1994

 

End of Document


RESPIRATORY AILMENT DRUG BEING RECALLED
The Capital (Annapolis, MD.)
January 8, 1994, Saturday

 Copyright 1994 Capital-Gazette Communications, Inc.
Section: Police Beat; Pg.  A7
Length: 281 words
Byline: By Mary Ellen Lloyd
Body



Some local doctors' phones are ringing steadily as worried asthma and emphysema patients ask about a popular medication's recall this week.
The recalled product may be contaminated with a bacteria that could cause life-threatening respiratory infections in people with weak immune systems.
But most patients aren't affected because they use a different brand, strength or method of administering the medicine, said Dr. Richard Lavy, an Annapolis allergist.
Copley Pharmaceutical Inc. of Canton, Mass., on Wednesday announced a voluntary recall of all lots of its 20 milliliter vials of albuterol sulfate inhalation solution 0.5 percent. The drug, used in a nebulizer, is a generic version of Ventolin and Proventil, the most commonly prescribed drugs for clearing respiratory airways.
Those brand-name drugs were not being recalled, nor is the 0.083 percent, ready-to-use version of Copley's generic drug. Patients with the recalled product should return it to their pharmacist for a replacement drug. The recalled solution is distributed by Aligen, Astra, Geneva, Goldline, Harber, Major, Moore, H.L. Moore, Qualitest, Rugby and Schein.
Steven Tannenbaum, Copley's chief operating officer, said routine company quality tests in December detected a bacteria in some packages of the albuterol product. Dr. Lavy said the bacteria, commonly found in areas of poor drainage, is tough to manage with antibiotics.
People with AIDS, cystic fibrosis or chronic lung diseases and cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy or radiation treatment are already more susceptible to respiratory infections and may be at serious risk if they use the recalled drug, according Copley.
 Load-Date: November 3, 1994

 

End of Document


Judges Orders Limited Recall of Drugs, But Not Shutdown of Barr Labs
The Associated Press
February 5, 1993, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 486 words
Byline: By FRED PIERETTI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEWARK, N.J.
Body




A generic drug manufacturer must recall batches of seven medicines and stop distributing others until the company completes studies of its manufacturing process, a federal judge ruled.
But U.S. District Judge Alfred M. Wolin on Thursday refused a request by federal pharmaceutical regulators to order a temporary shutdown of Barr Laboratories Inc.
Wolin said the company, which has plants in Northvale and in Pomona, N.Y., had improved its compliance with federal food and drug standards since regulators started legal action against it early last year.
But Wolin agreed with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration that five drugs should be recalled. He also ordered Barr to halt distribution of 24 varieties of drugs until the company provided studies of its manufacturing processes. He ordered tests for 15 more products, but said the company could continue distributing them.
The FDA had sought to stop Barr from making and selling 15 pharmaceutical products and to force Barr to improve its production of 45 other drugs.
Barr President Bruce Downey said the company would comply with the court's orders. Downey emphasized that the recall was not for health and safety reasons. He said the drugs in question did not meet certain federal specifications in the manufacturing process.
No drugs will be recalled immediately. The FDA was ordered to submit recommendations on the type of recall. Wolin will then issue an order on the mechanics of the recall, including whether customers will be asked to bring in their unused portions.
Barr Laboratories stock was down sharply today. In late morning trading on the American Stock Exchange, it was off $ 3.62 a share at $ 9.25.
The FDA had accused Barr of mixing foreign substances into its drugs, using contaminated water in processing antibiotics, distributing mislabeled drugs, and repackaging and reselling drugs that had been returned as defective.
The FDA withdrew the contaminated water charge in August, Downey said. The recall isn't related to that charge, he said.
"We believe the court's decision was strongly in the public interest," FDA spokeswoman Betsy Adams said Thursday night.
The drugs Wolin ordered recalled were at least three varieties of erythromycin, an antibiotic; and batches from four other drugs, sulfisoxazole acetyl, another antibiotic; meperidine HCL, a pain killer and anesthetic; aspirin with codeine; and hydrocodone bitartrate with APAP, an analgesic.
In the past, Barr has said that the allegations were retaliation for the company's testimony in Congress against the FDA in 1989. Barr testified against the agency and other drug companies concerning allegations that drug companies were giving illegal gratuities to FDA officials.
Wolin agreed to issue his opinion after the close of trading on the stock market Thursday. Downey, who took over as president last month, said he could not guess how Wall Street would react to news of the limited recall.

 

End of Document


WARNER-LAMBERT VOLUNTARILY RECALLING SELECT DRUGS FROM DIRECT ACCOUNTS
PR Newswire
December 21, 1992, Monday - 09:02 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1992 PR Newswire Association, Inc.
Section: Financial News
Length: 259 words
Dateline: MORRIS PLAINS, N.J., Dec. 21
Body




Warner-Lambert Company (NYSE: WLA) today announced that as part of its ongoing discussions with the Food and Drug Administration, aimed at resolving manufacturing compliance issues primarily at its Puerto Rico facilities, it will be voluntarily recalling certain pharmaceutical products from direct accounts until such time as its manufacturing processes have been revalidated in accordance with FDA standards.
The company said it is in continuing dialogue with the FDA regarding these administrative issues and emphasized that the recalls do not involve any safety concerns and do not extend to the patient level.
As part of its effort, the company has retested hundreds of lots of marketed products and has demonstrated that all are within specifications. Substantial progress has already been made in the re- validation process.
The recall is limited to Centrax, Ergostat, Estrovis, Norlestrin, Norlutin, Pyridium, Norlutate and Tedral.
Warner-Lambert indicated that the costs involved in this effort would not prevent it from achieving the previously stated EPS gain of 15 percent it expects in 1992. The company also said that, on the basis of its current planning assumptions, it continues to be confident in its ability to generate double digit earnings growth in 1993.
Warner-Lambert is a worldwide company devoted to discovering, developing, manufacturing and marketing quality health care and consumer products. It employs approximately 34,000.
CONTACT: Peter Wolf (media), 201-540-6696, and Stephen Mock (investors), 201-540-6916, both of Warner-Lambert

 

End of Document


Class-action lawsuits blame recalled diet drugs for ailments
September 17, 1997, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 394 words
Dateline: MIAMI
Body




Two lawsuits from Miami and Texas seeking class-action status accuse the makers of the recalled diet drugs Redux and Pondimin of causing medical problems.
The suits, both filed Tuesday, are among 100 suits filed nationally regarding the drugs, which were ordered withdrawn from the market Monday by the Food and Drug Administration.
Two Miami women have suffered heart-valve damage and other side effects from the drugs due to inadequate or missing warnings, attorney John Ruiz said Wednesday. Their suit was filed against American Home Products, its Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories division, which sells the drugs, and Redux developer Interneuron Pharmaceuticals.
"We've been named in a number of lawsuits," American Home Products spokesman Lowell Weiner said. He declined to comment further because the litigation was pending.
One of the Miami plaintiffs, a hospital nurse identified in the Miami Circuit Court suit only as Jane Doe, got a prescription for Pondimin only after reading a detailed report on it in the Physician's Desk Reference, or PDR, an encyclopedia of pharmaceutical drugs, Ruiz said.
Pondimin is commonly known as fenfluramine, half of the popular fen-phen diet combination.
"She read the PDR before she took the medication," he said. "She felt comfortable."
Sonya Castenada, who took Redux, and Ms. Roe blame the drugs prescribed to at least 6 million people for similar heart problems, swelling of the ankles, shortness of breath, memory loss and chills.
Two Houston-area women are asking in their suit that 10 pharmaceutical companies be ordered to set up a special medical monitoring fund to test "fen-phen" users for a variety of health problems, primarily hypertension, heart-valve and pulmonary conditions.
The suit was filed on behalf of Barbara Lipschuetz of La Porte and Tammy Villarreal of Houston. Both were described as moderately overweight but healthy before their exposure to the drugs.
"This is the most potentially significant health case in memory," Houston attorney Tommy Fibich said. "With some 18 million prescriptions for these drugs, it is staggering."
The lawsuit named as defendants Gate Pharmaceuticals, Smithkline Beecham Corp., Zenith Goldline Pharmaceuticals Inc., Seatrace Pharmaceuticals, Abana Pharmaceuticals Inc., Richwood Pharmaceutical Co. Inc., Ion Laboratories, Medeva Pharmaceuticals Inc., A.H. Robins Co. and Wyeth-Ayerst.
 Load-Date: September 18, 1997

 

End of Document


Class-action lawsuit blames recalled diet drugs for ailments
September 17, 1997, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 249 words
Dateline: MIAMI
Body




Two Miami woman allege they suffered ailments from the recalled diet drugs Redux and Pondimin in perhaps the first class-action lawsuit over the drugs, their lawyer said Wednesday.
Although about 100 suits have been filed nationally, attorney John Ruiz said he believes his clients' action marks the first attempt to round up the prescription users under a national class-action suit.
Both women have suffered heart-valve damage and other side effects from the drugs due to inadequate or missing warnings, Ruiz charged.
The lawsuit was filed Tuesday against American Home Products, its Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories division, which sells the drugs, and Redux developer Interneuron Pharmaceuticals.
"We've been named in a number of lawsuits," American Home Products spokesman Lowell Weiner said.
He declined to comment further because the litigation was pending.
One of the plaintiffs, a hospital nurse identified in the Miami Circuit Court suit only as Jane Doe, got a prescription for Pondimin only after reading a detailed report on it in the Physician's Desk Reference, or PDR, an encyclopedia of pharmaceutical drugs, Ruiz said.
Pondimin is commonly known as fenfluramine, half of the popular "fen-phen" diet combination.
"She read the PDR before she took the medication," he said. "She felt comfortable."
Sonya Castenada, who took Redux, and Ms. Roe blame the drugs prescribed to at least 6 million people for similar heart problems, swelling of the ankles, shortness of breath, memory loss and chills.
 Load-Date: September 17, 1997

 

End of Document


GROUP DEMANDS FDA RECALL OF DRUG LINKED TO SUICIDE/DEATHS
PR Newswire
January 9, 1991, Wednesday - 20:52 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1991 PR Newswire Association, Inc.
Section: State and Regional News
Length: 236 words
Dateline: The following was released today by the Church of Scientology:
Body




SAN FRANCISCO, Jan. 9 -- Members of the Citizen's Commission on Human Rights (CCHR) today urged the San Francisco Food and Drug Administration (FDA) to investigate the complicity of the highly controversial, psychiatric drug Prozac in local suicides, deaths and violence.
The group is part of the international CCHR network established by the Church of Scientology in 1969 to investigate and expose psychiatric violations of human rights.
It has spearheaded the outcry against the violence-linked drug manufactured by the Eli Lilly company.
"Prozac is known to cause hostility, aggression, and violent suicidal behavior," said CCHR spokesperson Craig Hawkins.  "The case of Joseph Wesbecker, who opened fire on his co-workers in Kentucky, killing eight and wounding 12 others is only one shocking example."
CCHR members handed out the recent issue of FREEDOM magazine, which featured the "crashing" of Eli Lilly stock last year.  The crash began when several victims of violence related to Prozac, filed legal suits against Eli Lilly.
"Despite the fact that studies have shown conclusively that this drug is linked with psychotic violence, nothing has been done to protect the public.  Eli Lilly continues to market this killer drug to Americans," said Hawkins.  "Only through public outcry is the pushing of this poison going to be stopped."
CONTACT: Craig Hawkins of The Citizen's Commission on Human Rights, 415-864-6287

 

End of Document


Generic Drugs Recalled After Questions on Data
The New York Times
February 1, 1990, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Section: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk
Length: 664 words
Byline: By WARREN E. LEARY, Special to The New York Times
Dateline: WASHINGTON, Jan. 31
Body




The Bolar Pharmaceutical Company, a generic drug maker, announced today that it was recalling its version of a drug widely used to treat high blood pressure. The company had been resisting the action for months.
The company, based in Copiague, L.I., said it was recalling all lots of its version of Dyazide, the hypertension drug, as well as all lots of generic Dilantin, an anti-epileptic drug, because of questions about the accuracy of data it had submitted to the Food and Drug Administration in supporting its case for the drugs' approval.
The F.D.A. said patients using either of the recalled drugs should not abruptly stop taking the medication, but should consult their doctors about alternatives. Bolar said it had stopped distributing phenytoin, its version of Dilantin, in December.
Questions on Drug Data
An agency spokesman said earlier that the F.D.A. did not seek an emergency recall of generic Dyazide because it felt that leaving the product on the market would not cause immediate or serious health problems.
The recalls come a week after a Washington law firm representing Bolar, King & Spalding, informed the F.D.A. and a Congressional subcommittee that it was withdrawing all submissions made in the case involving the company's version of Dyazide after discovering a number of questionable documents, including some that appeared to be false.
The Congressional panel is investigating the generic drug industry, which makes less expensive versions of brand-name drugs whose patent protection has expired.
The company said today in a statement that it was recalling the two products because their equivalency to the brand-name drugs they imitate ''cannot be assured in light of serious questions concerning the accuracy and reliability of the documentation supporting the approval'' of the drugs.
Last August the drug agency told Bolar that the company had failed to demonstrate that its version of Dyazide had passed tests showing that it was biologically equivalent to the original product, made by the SmithKline Beecham company.
At the time Bolar refused requests by the F.D.A. and the Congressional subcommittee to recall the drug, and the agency began formal proceedings to withdraw approval of Bolar's hypertension drug. In September the F.D.A. told doctors that the agency no longer considered the generic drug to be therapeutically equivalent to the brand-name drug.
 
A Call to Lower Prices
Representative John D. Dingell, chairman of the House Energy and Commerce investigations subcommittee, which has been looking into generic drug problems, said in a letter to the F.D.A. that Bolar's recall left SmithKline as the only source of one of the country's most prescribed drugs, Dyazide. Since generic versions of Dyazide first appeared in 1987, he said, SmithKline has significantly raised the price of the drug and now stands to make huge profits. Mr. Dingell said he urged the company to lower its prices.
Bolar said it was conducting new bioequivalency studies of both drugs, but would not have results for at least two months. Even if the tests prove the drugs equally effective, the company said, there is no assurance the F.D.A. would approve them for sale.
The company, which had been one of the most successful in the growing generic drug industry, said its version of Dyazide accounted for about 38 percent of its estimated 1989 revenue of $133 million, and phenytoin represented about 2 percent. It estimated that the blood-pressure drug accounted for about 50 percent of its pretax income before adjustments for the recall.
Last Thursday the Securities and Exchange Commission suspended trading of Bolar stock for 10 days because it said the company had not released enough information about the what it described as apparently falsified documents.
Mr. Dingell has asked the commission to investigate the recent sale of Bolar stock by members of the company's management prior to being subpoenaed by a Federal grand jury in Baltimore that is looking into the case.

 

End of Document


Obesity Drug Recall Ends MIT Royalties
University Wire
September 29, 1997

 Copyright 1997 The Tech via U-Wire
Length: 623 words
Byline: By David D. Hsu, The Tech
Dateline: Cambridge , Mass.
Body




With the recall of the obesity drug dexfenfluramine on Sept. 15, MIT lost a revenue source previously expected to bring in at least one million dollars per year in royalties.
Dexfenfluramine, commercially known as Redux, was voluntarily recalled after some patients using the drug developed heart valve damage.
The bulk of the research on the treatment of obesity with dexfenfluramine was conducted at MIT by Richard J. Wurtman, professor of neuroscience, and his wife Judith, a research scientist in the Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Since MIT owns the patent on dexfenfluramine, the Institute received royalties, typically one to five percent of sales.
Sales of the drug in 1996 reached $ 132 million, according to The New York Times.
"We received more than one million dollars last year," saidLita Nelsen, director of the Technology Licensing Office.
After the Food and Drug Administration approved the drug in Nov. 1995, Wurtman said sales were expected to reach $ 600 million annually. One analyst had predicted $ 1 billion dollars in annual sales by 1999, according to The Boston Globe.
"This year, MITwill receive next to nothing" after the recall, Nelsen said.
However, royalties are not something MITdepends on, Nelsen said. Redux income was not used for general operations but rather for one-time costs.
Although the Institute is sorry that the money is gone, "it won't impact MIT in any noticeable way," Nelsen said.
Wurtman is waiting for more research on the drug's effect. "I don't know if there's any relationship between Redux and the cardiac symptoms simply because there hasn't been a controlled study," Wurtman said.
"I don't know if it's real or not," Wurtman said. He said he expects more information in a few months.
The recall occurred just over one year after the drug first went on sale in June 1996. A few months after Redux hit the market, Wurtman said the drug was identified as "the most successful new drug ever launched; over a million prescriptions have already been written."
The drug opened miracle-like expectations. Sheldon Levine, a diet doctor, even wrote The Redux Revolution, a book about the "most important weight loss discovery of the century."
Drug's safety questioned
Redux later graced the Sept. 23, 1996 cover of Time, but at that time, questions were already being raised about the drug's safety.
Minor side effects, like a dry mouth and fatigue, were noted. More serious side effects, like toxicity and hypertension, were cited by various studies.
Still, Redux managed to shrug off most of the bad publicity.
In July, the Mayo Clinic reported that 24 patients developed heart valve disease after taking a drug combination of fenfluramine and phentermine. Fenfluramine contains dexfenfluramine. There were also reports of cases of heart valve damage in patients taking only Redux.
The Mayo findings were reported in the Aug. 28 issue of the New England Journal of Medicine.
Later findings showed that of 291 patients screened, 30 percent had abnormal valve findings.
Based on the new data, manufacturers agreed to withdraw both Redux and fenfluramine, and the FDA recommended patients stop taking the drugs.
With the recall of Redux, questions have been raised about the FDA approval process. The FDA defends itself, saying that Redux labeling claimed that safety was not shown for longer than one year of use. In addition, dexfenfluramine had been marketed in Europe for over 10 years without displaying a link between the drug and heart valve problems.
Interneuron Pharmaceuticals, a company founded by Wurtman, licensed the patent and developed the drug. Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories produced and marketed Redux.
(C) 1999 The Tech via U-WIRE
 Load-Date: February 1, 1999

 

End of Document


FDA Orders Recall of New Antibiotic Drug
The Associated Press
June 5, 1992, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 330 words
Byline: By PAUL RECER, AP Science Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Omniflox, a new antibiotic sold by Abbott Laboratories, has been recalled from the market due to reports of severe adverse reactions, including three deaths, the Food and Drug Administration said Friday.
FDA spokesperson Faye Peterson said distribution of the drug has been halted and that all supplies are being recalled.
Omniflox is a broad-spectrum antibiotic used to treat infections of the lower respiratory system, the urinary tract and prostate gland, and the skin. The drug was approved by the FDA last January and Abbott started sales of the drug in mid-February.
The recall was ordered after 50 reports of severe reactions to the drug, including three deaths. The reactions included low blood sugar, especially in elderly patients. There also were reports of hemolytic anemia, a condition in which red blood cells are destroyed, and other types of blood cell abnormalities. Additionally, there were reports of both kidney and liver dysfunction. About half of the patients reporting kidney problems were required to receive renal dialysis treatment, the FDA said.
Still other patients, the agency said, experienced allergic reactions which, in some cases, included life-threatening breathing difficulties.
"Consumers who have the medication are advised to consult their physician and return any unused portions of the product to the place of purchase," the FDA said in a statement.
Cathy Babington, a spokesperson for Abbott Laboratories of Abbott Park, Ill. said that the company was voluntarily recalling the drug as a result of reports received by both the company and by FDA. She said the drug had been distributed nationwide, but she declined to say how much of the antibiotic had been sold or distributed.
The chemical name for Omniflox is temafloxacin and the FDA said that it is one of a new class of broad-spectrum antibiotics.
"Similar antibiotics of its class have not been reported to be associated with comparable numbers of serious adverse reactions," the agency said.

 

End of Document


A Recalled Diet Drug and Autism
The New York Times
October 26, 1997, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Long Island Weekly Desk 
Section: Section 14LI; ; Section 14LI; Page 9; Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 1080 words
Byline: By LINDA SASLOW 
 By LINDA SASLOW 
Body




FOR the last 11 years, Joshua Frome has been taking fenfluramine, a prescription drug sold as Pondimin. But unlike the millions of other users who have taken this drug to lose weight, Joshua, a 19-year-old Glen Cove resident, has relied on fenfluramine to be able to function in his daily life.
Before taking fenfluramine, Joshua, who is autistic, was unable to sit still or to pay attention, said his mother, Paula. His behavior was unmanageable, she said, and his I.Q. so low as to be immeasurable. A daily dosage of 80 milligrams of fenfluramine taken four times a day has increased his ability to focus and raised his I.Q., making him able to function on a fourth-grade level in reading and mathematical skills.
But now Joshua will be unable to get fenfluramine. Following a recent Mayo Clinic study that warned of dangerous side effects from the drug combination fenfluramine and phentermine (known as fen-phen), as well as from a second weight-loss medication, dexfenfluramine, the manufacturer announced an immediate withdrawal from the market.
Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories, a division of American Home Products Corporation, is the manufacturer of Pondimin (fenfluramine) and the distributor of dexfenfluramine (sold as Redux). The company recalled both diet products following the report by the Mayo clinic that cited 24 cases of heart valve disease in patients treated with the combination of phentermine and fenfluramine. These findings were published in the Aug. 28 issue of The New England Journal of Medicine.
Since then, the company and the Food and Drug Administration received further reports of abnormal symptoms from patients using dexfenfluramine or fenfluramine alone, or in combination with other weight loss products. Symptoms included shortness of breath, chest pain, fainting, swelling of the ankles or a new heart murmur.
Last month, the F.D.A. reported additional findings to Wyeth- Ayerst of abnormal echocardiograms in asymptomatic patients seen in five centers. These patients had been treated with fenfluramine or dexfenfluramine for up to 24 months, most often in combination with phentermine. Of the 291 subjects evaluated, 92 had abnormal echocardiograms, including 80 reports of mild or greater aortic regurgitation, and 23 reports of moderate or greater mitral regurgitation.
In the announcement of a voluntary and immediate withdrawal of fenfluramine and dexfenfluramine, the company's senior vice president of medical affairs, Dr. Marc W. Deitch said: "Even thought this new information is not derived from a thorough clinical study and is difficult to evaluate, the company is taking the most prudent course of action. Wyeth-Ayerst is committed to safeguarding the health and well-being of patients and insuring that health care providers have the latest medical information."
It is not known how many other autistic youngsters on Long Island take fenfluramine to control specific behaviors. The drug Pondimin, commonly used for autism during the 80's, has been largely replaced by other medications.
But for patients with autism like Joshua Frome, who have not responded to other medications, the withdrawal of fenfluramine from the market is a serious problem.
"When Joshua was in first grade, his behavior was so unmanageable that he was unable to stay in school," said Mrs. Frome.
Following several studies published in The New England Journal of Medicine that reported positive effects of fenfluramine on autism, the Fromes decided to try the medication for Joshua.
"The changes were astounding and immediate," said Mrs. Frome. "For a child who was so hyperactive that it was impossible for him to sit still, he became a different person. This was a boy who used to spend his days rocking on all fours and never making eye contact with anyone. And at 13, he was able to have a bar mitzvah, to read in Hebrew from the Torah, to stand in front of a congregation with poise and a smile on his face."
Fenfluramine does not cure autism but it can improve behavioral symptoms, said Dr. Keith Ditkowsky, a child and adolescent psychiatrist affiliated with Long Island Jewish Medical Center, who specializes in psychopharmacologic consultations and diagnoses.
The percentage of autistic children who respond to fenfluramine is relatively low, said Dr. Ditkowsky, but for those who do respond, the results are dramatic.
"For Joshua," he said, "the drug has improved his symptoms of hyperactivity, withdrawal and repetitive motions. Any attempts to decrease the dosage caused these behaviors to return in full force."
During a period when Joshua was having dental work, he could not take Pondimin because it was incompatible with specific necessary inhalers, said Mrs. Frome.
"Without the medication," she said, "he totally lost focus. I'd ask him to get up and get me a tissue, and I'd watch him stand up and totally forget where he was going and what he was supposed to do. Today, at 19, I can't imagine what he would be like without Pondimin."
Ellen Wolf, a Huntington mother of a 10-year-old autistic daughter and the past president of the Nassau-Suffolk Autism Society, said she knew of several children, including her daughter, who had taken fenfluramine, with mixed results.
The drug does not always work on autistic behaviors, said Dr. Ditkowsky, but for the small group of children who respond, the results are dramatic.
Research reported during the 80's in The Journal of Pediatrics and The New England Journal of Medicine concluded that fenfluramine treatment decreased blood serotonin concentrations in autistic children an average of 60 percent without serious adverse effects. This reduction was accompanied by a decrease in hyperactivity and distractive behavior, and improved attention.
Dr. Marcia Bergtraum, a pediatric neurologist with a private practice in New Hyde Park, said that during the 80's, fenfluramine was used extensively to treat autistic children, but it was not found to be very successful.
The current withdrawal of Pondimin is voluntary, which means that Wyeth-Ayerst can manufacture and release the drug on a case-by-case basis, said Dr. Ditkowsky.
"We have been in contact with the company and the F.D.A. to gain approval for Joshua," he said. "Joshua has already had numerous tests to rule out any potential heart problems."
While the percentage of success may be low for fenfluramine, Dr. Ditkowsky said, "in dealing with conditions that are so devastating, any success is significant that makes such a difference in the quality of life."
 Load-Date: October 26, 1997

 

End of Document


HEART DRUG RECALLED AFTER FDA SEIZURE
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 17, 1993, SUNDAY, FIVE STAR Edition

 Copyright 1993 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 1E
Length: 709 words
Byline: Robert Steyer Of the Post-Dispatch Staff
Body




KV Pharmaceutical Co. has recalled some of its prescription heart drug nitroglycerin for what the federal government says are inadequate quality controls during manufacturing.
KV initiated the recall of three strengths of the drug on Aug. 19 and Sept.  17.
The company could not assure regulators that the drugs would retain their potency through their expiration dates, federal documents say.
Nitroglycerin treats angina pectoris, which is chest pain associated with heart disease.
Federal inspection reports don't say how much nitroglycerin is being recalled or what percentage the recalled products represent of KV's nitroglycerin sales.
The recall is related to the Food and Drug Administration's seizure of most of KV's products April 21.
The FDA said the company failed to follow federal guidelines for "good manufacturing practices" in making tablets and capsules.
Batches of nitroglycerin capsules were among the products seized by the FDA in April.
But portions of some batches already had been shipped before the FDA quarantined the drugs, federal documents say.
"We are not recalling the entire product," said Sarah Weltscheff, a KV spokeswoman, who did not provide details on how much was being recalled.
KV signed a consent decree with the FDA in mid-June, promising to improve its manufacturing and quality-control activities within 180 days. KV admitted no wrongdoing.
The consent decree says KV can't distribute any of the seized drugs - including nitroglycerin - until KV convinces the FDA that its manufacturing controls meet federal guidelines.
In late August, company officials told shareholders at KV's annual meeting that more than 60 percent of the seized drugs were being shipped to customers.  They did not identify the drugs.
The FDA hasn't criticized the safety and efficacy of nitrogylcerin or any seized drug - just the company's record-keeping and quality control for manufacturing.
A Sept. 21 report by the FDA noted that KV had "serious deficiencies in the process and test procedures used for the manufacture" of nitroglycerin.
Federal records don't identify the value of the nitroglycerin seized by the FDA or recalled by KV.
Weltscheff said nitroglycerin "is not a big profit contributor for us." She did not elaborate.
Nitroglycerin is one of three generic drugs made by Ethex Corp., a KV subsidiary, which had $ 16 million in sales for the year ended March 31.  Those products represented 37 percent of KV's total sales.
KV does not identify sales for individual drugs. But KV says Ethex's drugs provide higher profit margins than many of KV's other products.
Details of FDA's action were obtained by the Post-Dispatch through the Freedom of Information Act.
The FDA does not require a company to publicize a recall. KV made no public announcement.
KV's recall affects 9-milligram, 6.5-milligram and 2.5-milligram versions of nitroglycerin.
KV has informed distributors about the drugs, who, in turn, are supposed to advise retail customers, federal documents say.
Although nitroglycerin is covered by the consent order on good manufacturing practices, the FDA considers the recall voluntary.
During the fiscal year that ended Sept. 30, 1992, the FDA conducted 17, 878 inspections nationwide and recorded 2,922 recalls, of which 524 were drugs recalls. The FDA also polices medical devices, food and veterinary products.
There are three types of recall:
Class I for products presenting an imminent health hazard and the probability of severe harm or death.
Class II for products that "may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse consequences." KV's heart-drug recall is in this group.
Class III for products posing little likelihood of harm.
The FDA says 68.5 percent of all recalls are in Class II, 7.5 percent are in Class I and 24 percent are in Class III.
The latest recall is KV's third since April 1992.
Last year, KV took back one batch of a decongestant, Nolamine, produced for another company in a Class III recall.
KV also recalled many batches of EES, a treatment for bacterial infections, in a Class II recall. EES is manufactured for three companies.
These voluntary recalls were unrelated to FDA's confiscation of KV's drugs in April.
In both cases, the FDA said the drugs might lose potency before their expiration date was reached.
 Load-Date: October 18, 1993

 

End of Document


AHP Earnings Drop Over Drug Recall
Associated Press Online
October 22, 1997; Wednesday 04:51 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Financial pages
Length: 430 words
Dateline: MADISON, N.J.
Body




The maker of the recalled diet drugs Redux and Pondimin on Tuesday blamed costs of the drugs' withdrawal for an 11.3 percent drop in third-quarter earnings.
American Home Products, which also makes Advil, Centrum, cold medications and prescription drugs such as Premarin estrogen supplements, reported earnings for the July-September quarter fell to $435.5 million, or 67 cents per share. That was down from $491.1 million, or 77 cents per share, a year earlier.
Excluding the recall costs, earnings were up 12.5 percent to $552.5 million, or 85 cents per share.
''This is in line with what (Wall) Street predicted for us,'' said spokesman Lowell Weiner.
Sales rose a bare 0.3 percent, to $3.48 billion from $3.47 billion, with the health care giant citing unfavorable foreign exchange rates, sale of its surgical products and American Home Foods businesses, and other factors.
The company took a charge of $117 million, or 18 cents per share, for inventory and other costs of withdrawing the drugs from the market. AHP did so Sept. 15 at the request of the Food and Drug Administration after reports surfaced in July linking heart valve damage and a potentially fatal heart and lung disorder to both Redux and the popular diet drug combination known as fen-phen.
Pondimin, known chemically as fenfluramine, is half the combination; the other half, phentermine, has not been recalled. Redux is known generically as dexfenfluramine.
For the first nine months, AHP's earnings climbed 7.3 percent to $1.47 billion, or $2.28 per share, from $1.37 billion, or $2.16 per share. Sales, however, slipped 0.2 percent for the nine months, to $10.58 billion from $10.61 billion.
Weiner said the diet drugs represented only $200 million, or 1.4 percent, of annual revenues of $14.1 billion.
''In the fourth quarter, we're estimating that we'll have a two-cent reduction in earnings due to the lost sales of Pondimin and Redux,'' he added.
The company noted the $117 million writedown does not cover future litigation costs for the dozens of class action and individual lawsuits filed by Redux and Pondimin users. American Home's general counsel, Louis L. Hoynes Jr., told analysts at a meeting three weeks ago that the company had little to fear from the lawsuits because it knew nothing about the side effects and never promoted the fen-phen combination.
Wall Street reacted favorably to the earnings report, given its low expectations. American Home shares rose $1.75 to $73.621/2 on the
YSE.
   (PROFILE
   (CO:American Home Products; TS:AHP; IG:DRG;)
   (CAT:Business;)
   (CAT:Medical;)
   (CAT:Consumer;)
   )
 Load-Date: October 22, 1997

 

End of Document


Study shows low consumer recall of advertised drugs
 Medical Marketing & Media
March 1999

 Copyright 1999 Gale Group, Inc.
All Rights Reserved
Business and Management Practices
Copyright 1999 Haymarket Media, Inc.
Section: Pg. 21; Vol. 34; No. 3; ISSN: 0025-7354
Length: 227 words
Highlight: Except for Viagra, only 8% or fewer of consumers surveyed could remember the names of drugs advertised on TV or in print
Body




* With the exception of Viagra, only eight percent or fewer of consumers surveyed were able to recall the names of drugs advertised in print or on TV. The unaided recall survey questioned 1,400 consumers as part of a bi-annual Pharmaceutical Company Image study by Scott-Levin.
Sixty-three percent of consumers could not recall any product names. Viagra was recalled by 34 percent, but the product received massive publicity and the survey was held during, the launch period. Claritin, for which $103 million was spent in DTC advertising in the first nine months of 1998, was recalled by only seven percent of those surveyed. Prozac was recalled by five percent. Pondimin for weight control, not advertised to the consumer and withdrawn from the market, was recalled by eight percent of those surveyed, most likely from news stories.
Andreas Tsukada of Scott-Levin said that low scores have been the tendency in response to general question by a broad audience participating in this study in the past. Companies fared little better in answer to unaided recall questions.
The most-recognized pharmaceutical manufacturers were Merck (13 percent), Pfizer (12 percent), and Eli Lilly (9 percent). Consumers were more likely to mention a product or company by name if they were chronic users of prescription drugs, age 55 or older, college graduates, or medically educated.
 Load-Date: October 8, 2004

 

End of Document


Recall of Drugs Leaves Many Dieters Hopeless
The New York Times
September 17, 1997, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 16; Column 4; National Desk ; Column 4; 
Length: 995 words
Byline: By CAREY GOLDBERG 
 By CAREY GOLDBERG 
Dateline: BOSTON, Sept. 16
Body




They know. They know that the drugs would not have been recalled lightly. But still, among the millions of American dieters who had seen Redux and the fen-phen combination as the weight-loss magic they crave, there were voices today expressing a loss of hope, and even sparks of defiance.
"If they sell them in Canada, I'll drive up there and come back with a carload of them," said Marlena Bendt, a 65-year-old woman in Hoffman Estates, Ill., who has struggled with her weight all her life and recently lost 70 pounds on fen-phen. "There are people who can't live without those drugs. For me, fen-phen is an alternative to dying."
For the obese and for those trying to respond to the dictates of a weight-obsessed culture, the struggle to lose weight often means weighing health risks against the chances of losing weight.
The response to Monday's recall of fenfluramine, or Pondimin, and dexfenfluramine, or Redux, highlighted the depth of frustration that makes many a dieter willing to risk whatever it takes if only, only he can stop being fat.
So intense can dieters' desire for pharmaceutical hand-holding become that some doctors said today they had to stonewall outraged patients who insisted on being prescribed the pills, recall or no recall.
Dr. Robert S. Nierman, an obesity specialist in Lexington, Mass., said a patient "came in today, knowing what happened yesterday, and said, 'I want my fen-phen back.' And I said, 'Let's do a black market, we'd make a fortune,' but she wasn't joking. And I said, 'You could die from heart disease' and she said, 'I want it anyway.' "
And one Boston weight-loss clinic official said that a patient had once warned her that if doctors here would not prescribe her the fen-phen she wanted, she knew a doctor in New York who would.
"And I thought, boy, this was like going to New York for an abortion," said Patricia Nelson, associate director of Feeding Ourselves, a hospital-affiliated treatment program for binge eating disorders. "That's a real testimony about how panicky people are about the issue."
Panicky, and sad today -- for though the drugs caused cardiological disaster for some, injuring their heart valves, they brought prospects of the slimness of fantasy to others.
"It's almost like, throw it out there and give people hope, then yank it away," said Maureen McNulty, a patient of Dr. Nierman's who had been losing weight on a program of drugs and behavior modification since March.
Andrew Rudnick, who founded a chain of five fen-phen-based weight-loss clinics around Boston last year after he lost 60 pounds on the combination, said today that he had been "looking at fen-phen when it first came out as the miracle pill that would change my life. And it's sort of like finding out that Santa Claus isn't real, you know?"
"It's a major letdown, when you thought you had the answer," he said.
Business has fallen off sharply lately for Mr. Rudnick, whose clinics stopped dispensing fen-phen a week ago, he said, even though his program offered herbal aids and tried-and-true behavior modification along with the pills.
The same goes for Dr. Nierman, who stopped prescribing fenfluramine five months ago when indications mounted that it could cause lung problems. He can still offer patients Ionamin, an amphetamine-like drug that suppresses appetite, as part of a program that includes behavior modification and education; but interest has fallen off, he said, now that there is no illusion of a fen-phen magic bullet.
Many weight-loss clinics around the country have found themselves in similar situations: the wave of attention that surrounded the release of Redux last year and prompted the creation of "pill mills," or weight-loss clinics built on prescriptions, gave way in recent months to a reverse wave of negative publicity. In Boston alone, nearly half the weight-loss clinics that advertised fen-phen and Redux in this year's yellow pages seemed to have already gone out of business, their phones disconnected.
So the actual recall of the two popular drugs did not come out of the blue. Neither did word of side effects. Along with the more serious effects now documented in the study that led to the recall, some fen-phen users reported an uncomfortable hyper feeling, foggy thinking and other troubles.
"You're taking legalized speed," said Helen Shull, a retailer in Newport Beach, Calif., who lost 30 pounds on phen-fen but has since gained them back. "We all want that quick fix. It was the answer."
But, she said, "Now, it will kill us, like everything."
Florida became so concerned about fen-phen related medical problems that it banned the combination anti-obesity drugs on Sept. 9. In July, 53-year-old Patricia Mishcon, the wife of Mayor Jeffrey Mishcon of North Miami Beach, had died after taking fen-phen prescribed by an ophthalmologist who also ran a weight-loss clinic, and the local coroner linked her death to the drugs, The Miami Herald reported.
"If nothing else comes out of this, hopefully folks will step back and think a little bit before they run off to the next popular treatment of a very serious disease," said Allen Grossman, the state's assistant attorney general.
A similar message came today from Sharon Damiani, 59, of Kennesaw, Ga. Her condition was diagnosed as severe primary pulmonary hypertension, a rare and often fatal disease that has been associated with phen-fen, after she used the drugs to lose weight.
To those who are angry over the recall, she said, she would say, "Please, think it over. There's other ways and other means to lose weight. Walk. Don't eat fat, don't eat sugar. Otherwise, be prepared to be thin in your coffin, and see how your family accept that, looking down on you."
For many, however, the desperation remains. One fen-phen patient, a mother of two in western suburban Boston who insisted on anonymity, said she had asked her doctor if there weren't some way to introduce a tapeworm into her system.
"I'm just hoping for a freeze-dried worm," she said.
 Graphic



 
Photo: Dr. Robert S. Nierman of Lexington, Mass., runs a weight-loss program in the Boston area. (Keith Meyers/The New York Times)
 Load-Date: September 17, 1997

 

End of Document


ALLERGY REACTION INJECTIONS RECALLED; DRUG MAY NOT WORK IN 550,000 KITS FOR ASTHMA, STINGS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 1, 1999, Wednesday,
SOONER EDITION

 Copyright 1999 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY AND MEDICINE,
Length: 578 words
Byline: PHIL GALEWITZ, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




More than a half-million emergency injection kits for treating severe allergic reactions and asthma attacks are being recalled in the United States and Canada because the drug may not work.
The kits are routinely carried by people who are prone to acute asthma attacks or have deadly allergies to certain foods or bee stings, for example. Users inject themselves with epinephrine, also known as adrenaline, to counter the reaction.
The maker of the epinephrine, American Home Products' Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories, said yesterday that routine quality-control tests found that the drug was not as potent as it was supposed to be.
The recall involves three kits: the Insect-Sting Treatment Kit packaged and distributed by Derm/Buro Inc., and the Hollister Stier-Ana-Kit and the Ana-Guard, both packaged and distributed by Bayer Corp.
All of the kits are sold by prescription and cost around $ 40.
The kits should be returned to the hospital, clinic or pharmacy where they were obtained, American Home said.
Philip de Vane, North American medical director for Wyeth-Ayerst, said people should take no chances and should contact their pharmacists or health care providers to determine whether their kit is being recalled.
Consumers can call Wyeth-Ayerst at 1-800-999-9384.
About 450,000 Ana-Kits and 55,000 Ana-Guards are being recalled, said Kathleen Bauernschmidt, spokeswoman for Hollister-Stier Laboratories of Spokane, Wash. Bayer sold its allergy kit manufacturing business to Hollister-Stier in June. It was unclear how many kits were being recalled by Derm/Buro.
People who are prone to allergic reactions can suffer what is known as anaphylactic shock, in which swelling of the airways can cut off breathing and the heart can stop. Epinephrine, a naturally occurring hormone, is used to increase blood flow and restore breathing.
The number of kits being recalled represents about 25 percent of all allergic reaction kits on the market, Bauernschmidt said.
The recall is just the latest setback for American Home, which faces legal problems over its diet drugs and Norplant contraceptive device.
Overall, shares of American Home have fallen more than 40 percent this year because of the rash of problems. On Tuesday, the stock dropped 56 1/4 cents to $ 41.43 3/4 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Last week, American Home agreed to pay a reported $ 50 million-plus to settle claims from 36,000 women who said Norplant caused headaches, irregular menstrual bleeding, nausea and depression.
In August, a jury awarded $ 23 million to a Texas woman who claimed the company failed to warn her about the dangers of American Home's diet drugs Redux and Pondimin, which is part of the drug combination fen-phen. Hundreds of lawsuits are now pending nationwide against the company over the drugs' potential to cause heart-valve problems.
The company this summer suspended shipments of a childhood diarrhea vaccine after it was linked to bowel obstruction in 32 infants. And last year, American Home recalled the painkiller Duract after it caused fatal liver problems.
The allergy kit recall affects: Derm/Buro Insect-Sting Treatment Kits with the lot numbers 0397, 0497, 0597, 8141, 8139, 11464, 13239. The products were distributed between June 1997 and February 1999.
Also affected: Ana-Kits with lot numbers AK344 through AK363 and lot AK366, and Ana-Guard with lot numbers G00196 through G00220, and lots G00222 and G00223. They were distributed by Bayer between April 1997 and April 1998.
 Load-Date: September 3, 1999

 

End of Document


Doctor on road to recovery Bangor neurologist recalls drug battle
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
April 29, 1995 Saturday

 Copyright 1995 Bangor Daily News
Length: 1246 words
Byline: Roxanne Moore Saucier Of the NEWS Staff
Body




BANGOR -- Friday was a busy day for Bangor neurologist Dr.
Thaddeus Jozefowicz.  He spent some time in his office at Acadia
Hospital and got ready for a trip to Boston to speak at a
conference.
But there was also a trip to the Margaret Chase Smith Federal
Building downtown for pictures and fingerprints in preparation for
his arraignment next week in U.S. District Court on drug charges.
The one-page count makes cryptic reference to unlawful
possession of a Schedule III controlled substance.  Jozefowicz is an
addict, and he is accused of illegally having thousands of pills
from June 1991 to January 1994.  He used his doctor's
license to get them.
Jozefowicz, 52, has been drug-free for more than a year now,
and will be in the Committee on Physicians' Health program for
impaired doctors through the Maine Medical Association for five
years.  A plea agreement with the U.S. District Attorney's Office
calls for a $ 25,000 fine, two years' probation and 500 hours of
community service, but it also could allow him to keep his
physician'slicense.  First-time offenders are sometimes able to
have their cases erased down the road, but there are no guarantees.
U.S. Attorney Jay McCloskey explained Friday the reason for the
plea agreement.  "After an extensive investigation, we were
convinced that no one else is involved. " In other words, the drugs
were for Jozefowicz himself.
If the matter is treated as a criminal misdemeanor, it is
possible that Dr. J, as he is known, could avoid a trial and the
attending publicity to the details of what he did.  But he would
rather have the truth in the open than to live with rumors and
innuendo.
The Schedule III pills, containing nonaspirin and a synthetic
codeine, were acquired, Jozefowicz said, in three ways: by taking
samples at his former workplace, Neurology Associates; by ordering
large amounts of the drug for the medical practice; and on a couple
of occasions, by writing prescriptions for a couple of adult
relatives and then having them filled.  He didn't sell any of the
drugs, and he used them all himself.  At the end, he was taking 40
to 50 pills a day, in addition to abusing alcohol.
In the 1960s, Jozefowicz went to college in New York and
medical school in Italy.  "I found myself going through school using
more and more alcohol, but I never thought I had a problem," he
recalled.
He came to Maine in 1975 and the drinking increased, but he hid
it.  After his wife went to bed, he would go into his workshop "and
drink until I got drunk.  I had blackouts -- I'd find myself on the
floor.  But I never had an OUI; it never interfered with my work. "
Jozefowicz's drug use started when a specialist prescribed
hydrocodone for pain in his hip.  His hip got better, but
soon he was abusing the pills.  He started picking up samples at
work, and eventually filled two prescriptions he had written for
relatives.  He knew that wasn't legal, he said, and he switched to
ordering through wholesale drug companies for the practice.  The
Drug Enforcement Administration advises that a medical office have
one person in charge of medications, and Jozefowicz was the person
for his practice.
The average person might become drowsy from just a couple of
the pills he was taking, but the tolerance of an addict enabled
Jozefowicz to take large amounts dailywithout anyone noticing he
was under the influence, he said.
His physician did find some change in his blood work.  "He
asked, 'Are you drinking? ' and I said, 'Just a couple here and
there," Jozefowicz recalled.
"I realized at one point I was addicted, and I realized I
couldn't tell anybody, and I didn't know how to stop," he said.  He
tried decreasing the number of pills he took each day, and that
didn't work.  "I went through cold turkey (quitting altogether), and
I went through hell. " He went back to the drugs.
Jozefowicz planned to tell his physician he was addicted, but
he didn't.  He figured that eventually there would be "something
catastrophic" -- either a health crisis from his drug abuse, or a
run-in with the DEA.
In January 1994, one of his partners told him the DEA had
called to inquire about the medications being ordered.  Jozefowicz
didn't say anything.
"I went home and spilled my guts to my wife," he said.  She was
angry at first, but soon turned supportive.  He then told one of his
partners, and within hours the Maine Medical Association program
for impaired physicians got him into McLean Hospital in
Massachusetts for 3 1/2 weeks of detox and rehabilitation.
"We're no longer in Kansas, Toto," Jozefowicz remembered
thinking.  While he was at McLean, he got phone calls telling him
that the DEA had searched his office and his home for drugs.
Back in Bangor, he continued the MMA's five-year program --
reporting to Director Dr. John Dalco weekly, having his urine tested
for drugs twice a week, attending 12-Step meetings.  He voluntarily
surrendered his license to prescribe scheduled drugs.
A psychiatrist recommended that Jozefowicz go back to work, but
Neurology Associates declined to have him return.  During the seven
months he didn't work, he nurtured his love of music with frequent
sessions of playing piano in his church.
"That kept me going -- that and God and my family is what tided
me over in that very rough time," Jozefowicz said.
After a credentialing process and full disclosure of his
problem, he went to work at Acadia Hospital, which treats
psychiatric and substance-abuse patients.
"We have been truly fortunate in having someone with Dr.
Jozefowicz's training and experience forthe benefit of our
patients -- which has increased access to quality neurological
services.  Our strong sense is that rehabilitation in a physician's
home community is best, where support from family and colleagues is
readily available. "
Maine's program to rehabilitate physicians has been very
successful and has served as a national model, said Dr. Edward
David, member of the licensing board and former partner of
Jozefowicz.
As long as physicians abide by the program, the licensing board
knows about them "only by number," David said.  The exception would
be a doctor "who presents an imminent threat or has committed a
felony. "
Except for those kinds of situations, it would be possible for
a physician to complete the program successfully without his name
ever coming up before the licensing board.  "The program is designed
to return physicians to useful, productive lives," David said.
In the 15 months he has been "in recovery," Jozefowicz has
known that he would have to face his legal situation, but that's
not all.
"I needed to change my whole life -- my way of dealing with the
world, people and problems," he said, acknowledging that his
reputation for being judgmental was deserved.  "Things had to be
done my way.  I wanted everything instantly.  I was a person of
extremes. "
Jozefowicz knows that the coming months are going to be
difficult, and he's grateful for the support he's received from the community and the family he describes as "wonderful. " He will
continue to participate in Boy Scouts and Rotary and church and
professional associations, if they'll have him.
"I don't know what's going to happen tomorrow," he said.  "All I
can do is try the best I can, day by day.  I can't afford to take a
sip of wine.  I can't afford to take a pill of any kind. "
 Graphic



 
Dr. Thaddeus Jozefowicz
 Load-Date: May 1, 1995

 

End of Document


Mold, microbes force drug recall
United Press International
June 19, 1992, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 U.P.I.
Section: Domestic News
Length: 323 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Contamination by mold and microbes has forced a Washington state firm to recall all of its injectable mineral solutions and vitamin eye drops, the Food and Drug Administration announced Friday.
 The FDA warned that the products distributed by For Your Health,, Inc., of Kent, Wash., could cause life-threatening bacterial or fungal infections in people with weakened immune systems or other health problems.
 So far, FDA tests have found mold in two of For Your Health's products, intravenous solutions called magnesium-ATP and Solu-Cortef. FDA officials said they did not know the precise use of all the mineral solutions.
Solu-Cortef is manufactured by the Upjohn Co. of Kalamazoo, Mich. There are no known problems with Upjohn's product, which is a prescription form of hydrocortisone approved for treating arthritis and glandular disorders. The recall applies only to Solu-Cortef that was repackaged and distributed by For Your Health Pharmacy, the FDA said.
 The recall follows a May 6 seizure of products at For Your Health. The FDA tested samples of drugs produced at the pharmacy for contamination because the plant lacked proper controls to ensure product sterility.
 For Your Health officials could not be reached for comment Friday.
 Other products being recalled because of For Your Health's sterility problems include:
 -- vitamin A and C eye drops
 -- chromium liquid
 -- copper liquid
 -- manganese liquid
 -- selenium liquid
 -- vanadium liquid
 -- zinc liquid
 -- molybdenum liquid
 -- trace mineral solution
 -- saline solution
 -- glutathione
 All the products except for the eye drops were packaged in glass vials. The FDA said some labels may include the name ''For Your Health Pharmacy'' or ''Tahoma Clinic.'' Other products, however, may have no label nor include the firm's name, the FDA said.
 The FDA said it has been unable to determine how much of the products was distributed, where it went or what quantity remains on the market.

 

End of Document


Judge Orders Limited Recall of Barr Labs Drugs
The Associated Press
February 4, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 461 words
Byline: By FRED PIERETTI, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEWARK, N.J.
Body




A federal judge on Thursday ordered generic drug maker Barr Laboratories Inc. to recall limited batches of at least five medicines and stop distributing dozens more until the company finishes reviewing its manufacturing processes.
But U.S. District Judge Alfred M. Wolin refused a request by federal regulators to order a temporary shutdown of the Pomona, N.Y.-based independent drug maker, which has a plant in Northvale.
The Food and Drug Adminstration had accused Barr of mixing foreign substances into its drugs, using contaminated water in processing antibiotics, distributing mislabeled drugs, and repackaging and reselling drugs that had been returned as defective.
Federal prosecutors called Barr "among the worst violators" of FDA manufacturing guidelines.
Wolin said the company had improved its compliance with federal drug standards since regulators started legal action against Barr early last year. Testimony in the case ended in October.
"In light of Barr's recent makeover, both personal and physical, the Court is unwilling to order a temporary shutdown," Wolin wrote in a 79-page opinion. But Wolin agreed with the FDA that certain drugs should be recalled. The FDA had sought to stop Barr from making and selling 15 pharmaceutical products and to force Barr to improve its production of 45 other drugs.
Barr President Bruce Downey said the company would comply with the court's orders to provide studies of its manufacturing processes within one year.
Downey emphasized that the recall was not for "health and safety reasons." He said the drugs in question did not meet certain federal specifications in the manufacturing process.
The recalled drugs included several varieties of Erythromycin, an antibiotic, and batches from two other drugs, Sulfisoxazole Acetyl and Meperidine HCL.
Wolin also ordered Barr to halt distribution of 24 drugs until the company provided studies of its manufacturing processes.
The judge also ordered tests for 15 more products, but said the company could distribute them provided they were retested according to procedures his opinion detailed. Any new batches of those drugs must also be tested according to the same guidelines.
Last June, Barr agreed to stop making 115 drugs. The company currently makes 60 pharmaceutical products.
In the past, Barr has said that the allegations were retaliation for the company's testimony in Congress against the FDA in 1989. Barr testified against the FDA and other drug companies concerning allegations that drug companies were giving illegal gratuities to FDA officials.
Barr is one of the largest independent manufacturers of generic drugs, according to the Generic Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association in New York. It employs about 375 people, about two-thirds of them in New Jersey.

 

End of Document


Recall of Clot-Busting Drug Urged
Associated Press Online
February 10, 1999; Wednesday 17:36 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Financial pages
Length: 483 words
Byline: DAVID DISHNEAU 
Body




Consumer advocates urged the Food and Drug Administration on Wednesday to recall the clot-busting drug Abbokinase because it could be contaminated with infectious diseases such as hepatitis.
But federal regulators said they have already enacted sufficient consumer protections, including urging doctors to consider using alternative clot-busters.
The FDA last year found manufacturer Abbott Laboratories and supplier BioWhittaker failed to adequately test the neonatal kidney cells used to make the drug. As a result, the FDA suspended sales of Abbokinase in November to investigate the safety violations.
FDA inspection reports say the tissue was obtained from stillborn babies and prematurely delivered fetuses without adequate screening to ensure that they and their mothers were healthy.
After extensive sampling of the drug found no proof of contamination and Abbott upgraded its safety methods and added warnings to the drug's label, the FDA let sales resume Jan. 25.
The Washington-based consumer group Public Citizen said those measures aren't enough. Sidney Wolfe, the group's health research director, charged that FDA ignored its own inspectors' recommendations to seize $100 million worth of Abbokinase and the raw materials used to make it kidney cells from dead babies in Cali, Colombia.
''If you have your choice of being injected with something that may be contaminated and something that isn't, most people would choose the one that isn't contaminated,'' Wolfe said.
''Abbott and the FDA are making a travesty of public health'' he wrote in a letter dated Wednesday to FDA Commissioner Jane Henney.
He demanded an FDA investigation into the ''extremely suspicious circumstances'' in which BioWhittaker of Walkersville, Md., obtained the kidney cells it sold to Abbott of North Chicago, Ill. BioWhittaker is a subsidiary of Cambrex Corp. of East Rutherford, N.J.
FDA officials said they were working with the companies to resolve the problems identified by inspectors.
''We are comfortable with our approach,'' said FDA biological products expert Dr. David Feigal.
Abbott spokeswoman Melissa Brotz said the product has been used by more than 4 million patients over the past 20 years with no reported cases of viral transmission.
''We remain confident Abbokinase is safe and effective. We are doing everything to improve the manufacturing process,'' she said.
Abbokinase breaks up blood clots in legs and lungs, and clears catheters used by extremely sick patients. There are numerous other alternatives that work equally well or better but are much safer, so recalling Abbokinase won't hurt patients, Wolfe said.
But some doctors insist Abbokinase works best in certain serious or life-threatening situations, So FDA concluded that if those doctors understand the potential infection risk, they can choose it.
   (PROFILE
   (CO:Abbott Labs; TS:ABT; IG:MDS;)
   (CO:Cambrex Corp; TS:CBM; IG:CHM;)
   )
 Load-Date: February 10, 1999

 

End of Document


Epilepsy drug recall causes customer confidence crisis
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
December 4, 1995, Monday

 Copyright 1995 Telegraph Herald
Section: News, Pg. b 9
Length: 286 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Warner-Lambert Inc. has recalled a popular epilepsy drug eight times this year alone, causing a crisis in confidence among patients, but no medical problems, according to federal regulators.
In a strongly worded message to users of Dilantin, the Food and Drug Administration said last week that there's no reason to worry.
The 1995 recalls, and other problems with the drug dating back to 1990, were for minor quality fluctuations that were not medically dangerous.
"We have no evidence … that the Dilantin available today is not performing as expected in patients," the FDA said in response to dozens of phone calls from epilepsy patients worried after Warner-Lambert pleaded guilty to a felony for hiding quality problems with the drug.
No patient should stop taking Dilantin unless directed to by a doctor, because stopping could cause serious seizures, the FDA emphasized.
But some patients question whether they can believe the reassurance. They say the FDA shouldn't have waited three years to unveil its investigation of Dilantin, and federal regulators should have publicized the recalls.
Dr. Murray Lumpkin, the FDA's deputy drug director, said the FDA didn't consider it necessary to alarm patients by telling them of the recalls because they were for problems that didn't affect patient health.
Warner-Lambert agreed last week to pay a $10 million fine for concealing quality problems with Dilantin between 1990 and 1992.
Several batches of the drug did not dissolve at quite the proper rate - off by between 1 and 3 percentage points - but the FDA said the fluctuations were too minor to endanger anyone.
Patients may get more Dilantin information by calling the FDA at 301/443- 5006 or Warner-Lambert at 800/221-5618.
 Load-Date: December 10, 1996

 

End of Document


Potent asthma drug recalled by maker
United Press International
November 2, 1990, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1990 U.P.I.
Section: Domestic News
Length: 209 words
Dateline: MORTON GROVE, Ill.
Body




Pharmaceutical Basics Inc. Thursday recalled three lots of a medicine prescribed for acute asthma sufferers because some of the bottles may have been mislabeled as a cold remedy for children.
 The Federal Drug Administration, which announced the recall, said some bottles of Metaproterenol Sulfate, a bronchodilator, may have been packaged and labeled as Carbinoxamine Compound Drops, a drug used to treat cough and upper respiratory problems in children.
If the wrong drug is administered, infants could experience nervousness, rapid heartbeat, tremors and nausea, the FDA said.
 The FDA said parents should check the children's drug to make sure it's purple with a grape flavor and odor. The incorrect medication is yellow.
 The lots of Metraproterenol Sulfate Inhalation Solution being recalled carry a product code of 8676-30 with lot numbers of 1822K, 1821H and 18421C. Units of Carbinoxamine Compound Drops being recalled have product code 8951-30, with lot numbers 18222K, 18421H or 18421C on the top flap of the carton.
 It is the second recall issued by PBI in less than a month.
 On Oct. 10, the pharmaceutical firm recalled Qualitest Potassium Gluconate S.F. Exilir, a sugar-free potassium replenisher, because the labels incorrectly listed the potency.

 

End of Document


Recall of Clot-Busting Drug Urged
Associated Press Online
February 10, 1999; Wednesday 12:28 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington - general news
Length: 541 words
Byline: LAURAN NEERGAARD 
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Consumer advocates urged the government today to immediately recall a clot-busting drug called Abbokinase because it could be contaminated with such infections as hepatitis.
The Food and Drug Administration already has warned of the potential infection risk. Last month, the agency urged doctors to use the numerous other clot-busters sold instead, and to consider Abbokinase a last resort.
The FDA had suspended sales of Abbokinase in November to investigate whether there were safety violations in manufacturing. But extensive sampling of suspect Abbokinase failed to prove any vials actually are contaminated. Although that's not an absolute guarantee, the FDA let sales resume late last month once manufacturer Abbott Inc. had upgraded its safety methods to guard against future problems.
The consumer group Public Citizen charged today that FDA ignored its own inspectors' recommendations to seize $100 million worth of Abbokinase and the raw materials used to make it kidney cells from dead babies imported from Colombia.
Sales of the drug were estimated at $200 million a year.
The group called for an FDA investigation into the ''extremely suspicious circumstances'' in which Maryland-based BioWhittaker Inc. obtained the kidney tissue it sold to Abbott. Inspection reports say the tissue was obtained without proper screening to ensure the babies and their mothers were healthy.
Also, the group urged FDA to consider whether charges should be brought against the importer for bringing human body parts into the country without labeling them potentially infectious, required for proper Customs scrutiny.
''Abbott and the FDA are making a travesty of public health'' by letting Abbokinase sell with a warning label that says there's no guarantee it's safe, Wolfe wrote.
''We are comfortable with our approach,'' responded FDA biological products expert Dr. David Feigal. 
Abbott and BioWhittaker apparently followed certain safety standards deemed proper when the drug was first approved in 1978 _ not modern standards that FDA now requires, which include proper testing of newborns and their mothers to make sure neonatal tissue harbors no infections, Feigal said. Abbott has, however, upgraded to solve that problem, he said.
He added that for further reassurance, Abbokinase is heat-pasteurized, which can kill many infections.
Abbokinase breaks up blood clots in legs and lungs, and clears catheters used by extremely sick patients. There are numerous other alternatives that work equally well or better but are much safer, so recalling Abbokinase won't hurt patients, Wolfe said.
But some doctors insist Abbokinase works best in certain serious or life-threatening situations, Feigal said. So FDA concluded that if those doctors understand the potential infection risk, they can choose it.
''Some doctors feel it's lifesaving, others feel they can use alternatives successfully. We're not trying to second-guess that, just to make sure people understand this is a product that might have some risks,'' Feigal said.
As for Wolfe's complaint that Abbokinase sells even though its own label warns it can't be guaranteed infection-free, Feigal said FDA is about to put similar warnings on blood-derived drugs and other products made from human body parts.
 Load-Date: February 10, 1999

 

End of Document


Drug Manufacturer Biocraft Ordered to Recall Lots of Drugs, Halt Others
The Associated Press
July 28, 1994, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 249 words
Dateline: NEWARK, N.J.
Body




Biocraft Laboratories Inc., one of the nation's largest manufacturers of generic drugs, agreed Thursday to recall the lots of nine drugs and stop making five others.
Under a consent decree filed in federal court, the company will stop making the drugs - antibiotics, heart medication, and others - until an outside expert certifies they are being made in accordance with Federal Drug Administration guidelines.
Biocraft also must have an expert certify all its remaining drugs. If Biocraft does not meet any requirements, it will have to stop making the drug in question, the U.S. Justice Department said.
The agreement resolves a complaint filed by the Justice Department on July 21 accusing Biocraft of violating federal standards for testing, record-keeping, manufacturing and quality control.
The drug lots being recalled include commonly prescribed antibiotics: liquid amoxicillin for humans and for veterinary use, amoxicillin chewable tablets, cephalexin and liquid ampicillin.
Also to be recalled are lots of disopyramide capsules, a heart medication for angina and rhythm irregularities; liquid nystatin, an anti-fungal for yeast infections; sulfamethoxazole with trimethoprim, another anti-arrhythmic drug, and the diuretic amiloride.
Biocraft must halt production of liquid amoxicillin for humans and for animals, liquid ampicillin, amiloride and liquid nystatin.
A night production manager at Biocraft, based in Fair Lawn, N.J., said no one would be available to comment before Friday morning.
 Load-Date: July 29, 1994

 

End of Document


Recall of Clot-Busting Drug Urged
Associated Press Online
February 10, 1999; Wednesday 11:27 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington - general news
Length: 530 words
Byline: LAURAN NEERGAARD 
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Consumer advocates urged the government today to immediately recall a clot-busting drug called Abbokinase because manufacturing violations mean it could be contaminated with such infections as hepatitis.
The Food and Drug Administration already has warned of the potential infection risk. Last month, the agency urged doctors to use the numerous other clot-busters sold instead, and to consider Abbokinase a last resort.
The FDA had suspended sales of Abbokinase in November to investigate the safety violations. But extensive sampling of suspect Abbokinase failed to prove any vials actually are contaminated. Although that's not an absolute guarantee, the FDA let sales resume late last month once manufacturer Abbott Inc. had upgraded its safety methods to guard against future problems.
The consumer group Public Citizen charged today that FDA ignored its own inspectors' recommendations to seize $100 million worth of Abbokinase and the raw materials used to make it kidney cells from dead babies imported from Colombia.
The group called for an FDA investigation into the ''extremely suspicious circumstances'' in which Maryland-based BioWhittaker Inc. obtained the kidney tissue it sold to Abbott. Inspection reports say the tissue was obtained without proper screening to ensure the babies and their mothers were healthy.
Also, the group urged FDA to consider whether charges should be brought against the importer for bringing human body parts into the country without labeling them potentially infectious, required for proper Customs scrutiny.
''Abbott and the FDA are making a travesty of public health'' by letting Abbokinase sell with a warning label that says there's no guarantee it's safe, Wolfe wrote.
''We are comfortable with our approach,'' responded FDA biological products expert Dr. David Feigal.
Abbott and BioWhittaker apparently followed certain safety standards deemed proper when the drug was first approved in 1978 _ not modern standards that FDA now requires, which include proper testing of newborns and their mothers to make sure neonatal tissue harbors no infections, Feigal said. Abbott has, however, upgraded to solve that problem, he said.
He added that for further reassurance, Abbokinase is heat-pasteurized, which can kill many infections.
Abbokinase breaks up blood clots in legs and lungs, and clears catheters used by extremely sick patients. There are numerous other alternatives that work equally well or better but are much safer, so recalling Abbokinase won't hurt patients, Wolfe said.
But some doctors insist Abbokinase works best in certain serious or life-threatening situations, Feigal said. So FDA concluded that if those doctors understand the potential infection risk, they can choose it.
''Some doctors feel it's lifesaving, others feel they can use alternatives successfully. We're not trying to second-guess that, just to make sure people under this is a product that might have some risks,'' Feigal said.
As for Wolfe's complaint that Abbokinase sells even though its own label warns it can't be guaranteed infection-free, Feigal said FDA about to put similar warnings on blood-derived drugs and other products made from human body parts.
 Load-Date: February 10, 1999

 

End of Document


Company Curtailing Heart Drug Announces Recalls
The Associated Press
January 7, 1993, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1993 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 303 words
Byline: By DAVID BEARD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: SAN JUAN, Puerto Rico
Body




A pharmaceutical company on Thursday voluntarily recalled eight drugs made at two plants in Puerto Rico following an investigation by U.S. officials.
It said some of the drugs will be discontinued.
The recall by Warner-Lambert Co. is unrelated to manufacturing problems that forced the temporary curtailment of its nitroglycerin pill Nitrostate, which has caused a nationwide shortage of the primary medication for angina.
A Warner-Lambert spokesman, Peter Wolf, emphasized the drugs recalled did not pose a health risk to consumers. Wolf and officials of the Food and Drug Administration said letters went out Thursday to wholesalers and hospital pharmacies, but that many had been informed over the past several weeks.
Hundreds of lots are being recalled of anxiety medicine Centrax, the anti-migraine drug Ergostate, estrogen replacement Estovis, oral contraceptive Norlestrin, progestins Norlutin and Norlutate, urinary analgesic Pyridium and asthma drug Tedral.
Wolf, in a telephone interview from company headquarters in Morris Plains, N.J., would not say which products would be discontinued or why.
The recall followed an FDA investigation that began in 1991, said Stephanie Gray, who directs the 80-member FDA office in San Juan.
"We don't want to panic people, because they're not getting sick … but this is not an insignificant move," Gray told The Associated Press. She said she could not elaborate on the problems involving the drugs because an FDA investigation was continuing.
The drugs are made in plants in Vega Baja and Fajardo on this U.S. commonwealth, in which the company employs 1,700 people. Puerto Rico has been a haven for drug makers for decades because of tax breaks.
Gray estimates that between 40 percent and 50 percent of prescription medicines sold in the United States are produced in Puerto Rico.

 

End of Document


Abbott stock drops after drug recall
United Press International
June 8, 1992, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 U.P.I.
Section: Financial
Length: 261 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Abbott Laboratories' stock plummeted and led the active issues on the New York Stock Exchange Monday following the company's decision to recall a new synthetic oral antibiotic.
 The stock drop followed a Food and Drug Administration announcement Friday that Abbott would voluntarily recall Omniflox tablets and halt all further distribution.
The stock closed at $27.75 a share, down $4.125, on volume of 9,338, 700 shares.
 The Wall Street Journal said the company will take a charge against earnings in the second quarter for costs associated with the drug withdrawal.
 Abbott, based in Abbott Park, Illinois, reported sales of $6.9 billion in 1991.
 The drug, also known as temafloxacin, was approved by the FDA in late January and marketed in mid-February. Since then approximately 50 reports of serious adverse reactions to the drug, including three deaths, have been reported.
 The FDA said reactions included the destruction of red blood cells and other blood cells abnormalities, kidney dysfunction, liver dysfunction, and reports of allergic reactions, some of which have caused life-threatening respiratory distress.
 Temafloxacin is one of a newer class of synthetic oral antibiotics, used to treat infections of the lower respiratory tract, skin and skin structure, the prostate and urinary tract.
 According to the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers' Association, it cost a drug manufacturer an average of $231 million to bring a drug approved in 1991 from research and development into the marketplace.
 Representatives from Abbott Labs were not available for comment.

 

End of Document


NEW INDIANA FIRM TO NOTIFY PHARMACIES OF DRUG RECALLS
 Indianapolis Star (IN)
February 28, 1996

 Copyright 1996 Responsive Database Services, Inc.
All Rights Reserved
Business and Industry
Copyright 1996 Indianapolis Star provided by Knight-Ridder
Length: 1143 words
Highlight: Automated telephone service established to notify about 66,000 US pharmacies of drug recalls
Body




ABSTRACT:
National Notification Center will use automated telephone messages to notify pharmacies nationwide about drug recalls within four hours. The company, which targets more than 250 drug companies in the country with sales of $1 million or more, has set up a bank of computers in St. Louis which can send calls to the country's about 66,000 pharmacies including retailers, those in prison, methadone clinics, nursing homes and Indian Health Services sites. The automated call enables the pharmacies to receive and acknowledge drug recall notifications by pressing corresponding numbers on their telephones. The 7-person company, which was founded by four former Eli Lilly and Co. employees, would likely receive a retainer, depending on the magnitude of the service required, from drug companies in case of a recall. According to the company, which has yet to land its first contract, recalls would disrupt even large firms such as Eli Lilly which had 1995 sales of $6.8 billion. In 1994, Eli Lilly recalled three antibiotics, Ceclor, Keflex and Lorabid, because of small plastic caps found in four bottles, while Copley Pharmaceutical Inc. recalled its Albuterol due to bacterial contamination. There is no additional significant information in the full-text.
Byline: Chris O'Malley
Feb. 28--Four former Eli Lilly and Co. employees have started their own company to notify pharmacies of drug recalls.
National Notification Center will use a bank of computers to send automated phone messages to the nation's approximately 66,000 pharmacies in less than four hours.
Today, drug companies use first-class mail to notify pharmacies, which means it may take days for everyone to be notified.
"There's got to be something better than first-class mail," said Michael R. McConnell, general manager of National Notification Center. "No company will ever be good at recalls. They're not supposed to be," added the pharmacist, who worked in sales, marketing and market analysis at Lilly.
The seven-person firm occupies former offices of a law firm with a dramatic view of Monument Circle at 20 N. Meridian St., in the Guaranty Building. The rent is relatively cheap, though, and that's a good thing: National Notification Center has yet to land its first contract.
McConnell confirms that talks have begun with companies including Lilly.
Drug companies likely would pay a retainer to National Notification and then pay other fees in the event of a recall. Those fees would vary, depending on the number of products involved and severity of the action.
National Notification wants to be the central recall service for the more than 250 pharmaceutical companies in the United States with sales of $1 million or more. McConnell knows the disruption a recall can bring even to a company as large as Lilly, with 1995 sales of $6.8 billion. In 1994, the former retail pharmacist worked nights and weekends alongside dozens of fellow Lilly employees to get out the word on Lilly's recall of three oral antibiotics -- Ceclor, Keflex and Lorabid.
Small plastic caps were found in four bottles, and one child reportedly choked but was not injured. The caps were suspected to have come either from pieces of cleaning equipment at plants or from measuring devices that patients mistakenly placed into the bottles while dispensing.
Lilly moved swiftly to notify pharmacists, McConnell said, and even X-rayed bottles.
But if a recall could be disruptive for big Lilly, what about smaller companies with fewer resources and more serious problems? That thought troubled him.
"Whatever happened if they didn't do a good job? Wouldn't it compromise human health? I would go to sleep at night thinking about it," he said.
McConnell points to a 1994 recall case involving Copley Pharmaceutical Inc. Its Albuterol, a prescription drug used by those with breathing problems, was recalled for bacterial contamination.
The company issued the highest-level alert, a "class one" recall, but pharmacists still complained they were confused about the nature of recall. Some doctors and patients complained they were never notified.
A better notification system is not only a good business opportunity, "it is something society needs," McConnell said.
The 44-year-old McConnell resigned from his secure job of 13 years at Lilly in March 1995 to help build the notification company.
Later to follow was Lilly employee and pharmacist Stephen L. Speth, 44, and Alisa K. Wright, 31, who worked in areas including process development, production scheduling and control and regulatory submissions at Lilly.
Another National Notification Center principal, chief financial officer John H. Barnard, 52, had been Lilly's controller of international operations and was former controller at DowElanco Corp.
Among the first tasks of the budding entrepreneurs was compiling a list of 66,000 pharmacies, which McConnell now considers the best list in the nation. Besides retail pharmacies, the list includes those in prisons, methadone clinics, hospitals, nursing homes and Indian Health Service locations.
Early on, the entrepreneurs explored altering pharmacies via computer or fax machine. But not all pharmacies have that equipment. The simple solution was a device nearly all have -- a telephone.
A computer bank has been set up in St. Louis that can place vast amounts of phone calls to pharmacies in four hours or less.
Without its first drug company customer, National Notification sent out demonstration calls to pharmacies. A sample call begins: "This is the National Notification Center with an urgent message about a drug recall..."
The voice then asks the pharmacy employee to put a pharmacist on the phone. If they can't, they're given the option of entering a number that instructs the computer to call back later or gives the option of calling a toll free number to call. The pharmacist presses another number to hear the recall notice. Pressing other numbers confirms that the message was received and can instruct the company to fax the pharmacy a copy.
National Notification Center bounced its concept off the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, which monitors recalls.
Company officials said the FFDA recommended it also consider recall notifications for medical devices such as pacemakers, and food products.
Those are a possibility, but for now, National Notification is concentrating first on what its founders know best, pharmaceuticals. The company has placed ads in a number of trade journals. It's also caught the attention of publications by pharmacist associations in Arizona, California and Maryland.
The mission of the company: "No person should be harmed as a result of a delayed, unclear or incomplete notification."
-----
ON THE INTERNET: Visit Star/News On-Line, the World Wide Web site of The Indianapolis Star and The Indianapolis News. Point your Web-browsing software to http://www.starnews.com
-----
 Load-Date: September 20, 2004

 

End of Document


Drug company expands recall of Albuminar Plasma drug suspected in four blood poisonings
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
October 4, 1996 Friday

 Copyright 1996 Bangor Daily News
Length: 275 words
Byline: The Associated Press
Body




WASHINGTON -- A Pennsylvania company that recently recalled
human albumin linked to blood poisoning announced Thursday it was
taking 100,000 more vials of the product off hospital shelves.
Sold under the brand name Albuminar, the product made from
plasma is used to treat low blood pressure in burn and shock
victims and dialysis patients.
Manufacturer Centeon, of King of Prussia, Pa., recalled one lot
of Albuminar in late September because of evidence it was tainted
with the bacterium Enterobacter cloacae.  Two patients, one in
Kansas and one in Wisconsin, survived serious blood infections
after receiving albumin from that lot.
Since then, the Food and Drug Administration has investigated
two additional cases of blood poisoning, one that does appear
linked to the recalled Albuminar and another more questionable.
Now Centeon is recalling nine more lots of Albuminar as a
precaution.
Centeon discovered that vials in those lots may have been
damaged during transport through its plant, and thus might have
undetected cracks through which germs could penetrate, Centeon
said.
Centeon also is investigating whether such cracks could explain
problems with the first batch of Albuminar it recalled.
The recalled lots are: P18607, L8212, M60902, M5412, L58211,
M61403, M63204, M54912 and P61805.  The earlier recalled lot is
P61205.
Leftuntreated, blood poisoning associated with Enterobacter
cloacae can be fatal, in worst cases within hours.  Symptoms include
a high fever that spikes rapidly, shaking chills and an abrupt drop
in blood pressure.
Centeon can be reached at 1-800-504-5434 or 1-800-683-1288.
 Load-Date: October 4, 1996

 

End of Document


Centeon Recalls Batch of Hemophiliac Drug
October 5, 1996, Saturday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 337 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Less than a week after Centeon recalled a batch of drugs linked to blood poisoning, the Pennsylvania company is recalling about 1,600 vials of a drug used by hemophiliacs.
In the most recent case, Centeon is voluntarily recalling about 1,600 vials of Monoclate-P, which were distributed to 28 health care providers in May. The lot being recalled is P72304, expiring April 12, 1998.
The concern was that some of the vials may have cracked during the manufacturing process, although no illnesses have been reported, the company and the Food and Drug Administration said Friday.
"The bottom line is you have another product made in the same plant, and we discovered that a similar thing happened," said Dr. Jay S. Epstein, director of the Office of Blood Research and Review at the FDA.
In each case, Epstein said, the FDA suspects the vials were dropped.
"Cracked vials would be at risk for contamination," he said.
The company, located in King of Prussia, Pa., added that if a vial was cracked, it would lose its vacuum and users would notice that it was not working properly.
People or institutions who have the affected medicine should return it to the manufacturer.
Monoclate is used to treat people with hemophilia A, or classic hemophilia, a genetic disease that prevents normal blood clotting.
Last week and again earlier this week, Centeon recalled batches of Albuminar from hospital shelves, including more than 100,000 vials. Made from plasma, Albuminar is used to treat low blood pressure in burn and shock victims and dialysis patients.
Centeon recalled one lot of Albuminar in late September because of evidence it was tainted with the bacterium Enterobacter cloacae. Two patients survived serious blood infections after receiving albumin from that lot.
An additional nine lots were recalled after the FDA investigated two additional cases of blood poisoning, one that does appear linked to the recalled Albuminar and another more questionable.
For questions, Centeon's customer support center can be reached at 1-800-683-1288.
 Load-Date: October 5, 1996

 

End of Document


Health Ministry, FDA recall two diet drugs
The Jerusalem Post
September 18, 1997, Thursday

 Copyright 1997 The Jerusalem Post
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 498 words
Byline: Judy Siegel
Body




 Popular diet drugs taken by several million Americans and 1,500 to 2,500 Israelis have been taken off pharmacy shelves here and abroad. The drugs, generically known as fenfluramine and dexfenfluramine, are suspected by the US Food and Drug Administration of causing defects in the heart valves of some obese patients who took them.
 The unusual FDA recall two days ago - the first drug is on the market since 1973 and the other since last year - led the Health Ministry to make a similar move.
Dr. Yair Gibor of Abic, the local importer, said yesterday that anyone with packages of fenfluramine tablets (commercially known as Ponderax) or slow-release capsules (Ponderax Pacaps) should bring them,sealed or opened, back to their pharmacy for a refund.
 The ministry has also barred pharmacists from preparing the drugs from raw materials.
 Dexfenfluramine, which is sold in the US as Redux, was never approved for sale here. At least three deaths linked to the medications, marketed by Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories, have been reported in the US. The drugs have been prescribed to obese Americans in combination with phentermine, which may still be sold here but is much less effective on its own. The combination is known as Fen-Phen. According to Health Ministry pharmacist Rahel Gutman, Fen- Phen is not banned in Israel although it is not a widely accepted treatment.
 The FDA examined a report in July from the Mayo Clinic that said 24 cases of a rare disease of the heart valves had been detected in patients taking the diet drugs. Since then, 66 more cases of heart valve abnormalities were reported in the US, but the patients did not suffer characteristic symptoms, such as shortness of breath, palpitations, extreme fatigue, swelling of legs and heart murmurs. The FDA also declared there was no evidence that phentermine was unsafe.
 The diet drugs affect the neurotransmitter serotonin in the brain, which is believed to influence how satisfied people feel after eating.
 Dr. Earl Harow, a US-born general practitioner who has treated 70 to 80 obese patients in his Jerusalem clinic since January with fenfluramine, said he would immediately stop prescribing it.
 He said that "the decision to recall was correct, given the fact that a significant number of patients who took them (the drugs) had signs of heart valve problems, even if most were without symptoms."
 Harow hoped that other diet drugs in the pipeline would be available soon. "Doctors who treat obesity - not five or 10 extra kilos but a body-mass index of 30 or more - are saddened to see patients struggle with their weight. In the US alone, 300,000 people die of obesity each year.
 "The fenfluramine gave patients a feeling of satiety for the first time in their lives; they were then able to change their lifestyles, exercise and observe a healthier diet," he said.
 Both Harrow and Gibor said they knew of no heart-valve complications among Israeli patients who took the drugs.
 Load-Date: September 23, 1997

 

End of Document


Centeon Recalls Batch of Hemophiliac Drug
October 4, 1996, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 269 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A Pennsylvania company is recalling one batch of a drug used by hemophiliacs out of concern that some of the vials may have cracked during the manufacturing process, possibly by being dropped.
Centeon, located in King of Prussia, Pa., is recalling about 1,600 vials of Monoclate-P, which were distributed to 28 health care providers in May.
The lot being recalled is P72304, expiring April 12, 1998.
The recall is a precautionary measure, the company and the Food and Drug Administration said Friday. No illnesses have been reported due to the problem with the vials.
"Cracked vials would be at risk for contamination," said Dr. Jay S. Epstein, director of the Office of Blood Research and Review at the FDA.
The company added that if a vial was cracked, it would lose its vacuum and users would notice that it was not working properly.
People or institutions who have the affected medicine should return it to the manufacturer.
Monoclate is used to treat people with hemophilia A, or classic hemophilia, a genetic disease that prevents normal blood clotting.
This is Centeon's second recall in two weeks. It recently removed 10 lots of Albuminar from hospital shelves, including more than 100,000 vials. Made from plasma, it is used to treat low blood pressure in burn and shock victims and dialysis patients.
The two recalls are related, Epstein said.
"The bottom line is you have another product made in the same plant, and we discovered that a similar thing happened," he said, explaining that the FDA suspects that in each case, the vials were dropped.
For questions, call Centeon's customer support center at 1-800-683-1288.
 Load-Date: October 5, 1996

 

End of Document


DRUG BOOKLET RECALL
Herald Sun
November 13, 1995 Monday

 Copyright 1995 Nationwide News Pty Limited
Length: 424 words
Byline: HUDSON P
Body




FEDERAL Health Minister Dr Carmen Lawrence has set up a review of procedures which allowed taxpayers to fund a booklet which described heroin as a very safe drug for recreational use.Dr Lawrence has told staff there must be greater scrutiny of the content of publications.She has also instructed the Health Department to recall the booklet entitled, Pleasure Principles: A Consumers Guide.About 10,000 copies were published through a Federal Government grant to the Victorian AIDS Council/Gay Men's Health Centre in Melbourne and aimed at gay drug-using men.The funding for the booklet was awarded in 1992, before Dr Lawrence became Health Minister.A spokeswoman for Dr Lawrence yesterday said the minister understood the message was specifically aimed at gay drug-using adult men, but did not approve that sort of material being circulated."Dr Lawrence does not condone any booklet which promotes the benefits and joys of illicit drug use," the spokeswoman said. The booklet also contained detailed instructions of how to smoke, snort, inject and swallow illegal drugs such as heroin and ecstasy.It also provided details on how to get the most out of drugs at rave parties.A Sydney schoolgirl recently died after taking ecstasy at a rave party.The Herald Sun received many phone calls from people angry about the publication.Opposition health spokesman Dr Michael Wooldridge said last week the booklet was a disgrace and should frighten all parents about the information which might reach their children.
He said it was a handbook on how to break the law."It endorses drug-taking as a perfectly natural part of having a good time," Dr Wooldridge said."It's outrageous to say in a booklet that heroin is a very safe recreational drug and even more outrageous that it has been funded by the Health Department."Just like the government's other bungled attempt at community information, the notorious Cleo Sex Guide, it can find and has found its way to impressionable young people. "He said education about drugs and alcohol was important, "but you have a duty of care and that has been breached."To have a booklet which calls heroin a very safe drug is frightening," Dr Wooldridge said."It certainly should not endorse and glamorise illegal and dangerous behaviors. "As a doctor at the Alfred Hospital, Dr Wooldridge said he had seen what heroin could do."It certainly cannot be described as very safe," he said.Life Education Centres director of research Terry Metherell said the book was dangerous and utterly irresponsible.END OF STORY
 Graphic



 
CARMEN LAWRENCE
 Load-Date: October 1, 2003

 

End of Document


Diet drug maker expects little long-term effect from drug recall
September 29, 1997, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 674 words
Byline: By JOHN HENDREN, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




American Home Products executives said Monday the recall of two diet drugs has prompted 21 class action lawsuits from dieters, but they also said the law is on the drug maker's side.
The Madison, N.J.-based consumer products giant did receive 11 "adverse drug reports" on the diet drugs Redux and Pondimin, out of 6 million users, before a Mayo Clinic report linked the drugs to heart problems in May. But the reports from patients were "very isolated and very scattered," company general counsel Louis L. Hoynes Jr. told analysts at a meeting in New York.
The company said it should have little to fear from the class-action suits and dozens more filed by individuals because the company had no duty to warn patients of side-effects of which it knew nothing.
"The law does not impose a duty to warn about an unknown and inintended risk," Hoynes said. "We will proceed knowing that we have always acted responsibly and in a timely manner."
The company recalled the drugs earlier this month at the request of the Food and Drug Administration, forcing thousands of dieters nationwide to alter their weight-loss regimens.
Analysts' say the company's legal exposure is probably limited. Most of the claims come from those who took Pondimin, generically called fenfluramine, with the drug phentermine, a combination known as "fen-phen" that was neither approved by the FDA nor promoted by the company, the company said.
Pondimin, generically known as fenfluramine, had been on the market since 1973 in the United States. Redux, or dexfenfluramine, was used in Europe for 10 years, although it was only approved in the United States in mid-1996.
The company pointed out that the Mayo study did not show that the drugs caused heart damage, only that a statistical link may exist.
Several analysts have urged investors to buy the stock. The company has already earned half of the $ 400 million analysts at Salomon Brothers had expected the company's Wyeth-Ayerst division to earn on the obesity drugs this year.
But even if the company is found to be responsible, its penalty is unlikely to go much beyond the $ 2.8 billion settlement it reached for patients who used the Dalkon Shield birth control device, said Mariola Haggar, an analyst at Deutsche Morgan Grenfell. The company could raise that amount by using its estimated $ 1 billion in product liability insurance, $ 1 billion in cash reserves, $ 2 billion it could garner by selling its medical devices division, she said.
The company has no further plans to market an obesity drug, and sent one candidate back into early development after it failed to show satisfactory results, Wyeth-Ayerst President Robert I. Levy said.
And Unlike Servier, which markets Redux in Europe, American Home Products does not foresee putting Redux and Pondimin back on the market - even if it is cleared of the suspected side-effects in future tests - said John R. Stafford, AHP's chairman, president and chief executive officer.
"Right now we have no plans and are not giving any consideration to remarketing them," he said.
American Home estimates the drug recall will cost it $ 300 million before taxes. Without that, earnings would have grown 10 percent in the third quarter and 12 to 13 percent for the year. The recall is expected to cost 10 cents a share for the year, lowering analysts 1997 earnings estimates to about $ 3.34.
The gathered analysts to preview its upcoming drug lines. Among the products that drew enthusiasm was Fiblast, a drug in early-stage development to treat stroke victims. The company introduced TSE-424, its own entry into a competitive race among drug makers to develop a product to replace Premarin, the Wyeth-Ayerst estrogen drug that, at $ 1 billion, is the best-selling drug in the nation. Unlike Eli Lilly & Co.'s raloxifene, which could receive FDA approval in November, TSE-424 is in early tests.
Nevertheless, many analysts left little concerned over the future cost of the diet drug recall.
"The pipeline for this company now appears better than it has for 15 or 20 years," Ms. Haggar said.
 Load-Date: September 29, 1997

 

End of Document


New Jersey-Based Drug Maker Recalls Allergy Kit
 Star-Ledger (Newark, NJ)
September 1, 1999

 Copyright 1999 Responsive Database Services, Inc.
All Rights Reserved
Business and Industry
Length: 389 words
Highlight: American Home Products Corp recalls over 500,000 emergency injection kits used for treating severe allergic reactions recalled because the drug may not work
Body




Sep. 1--More than 500,000 emergency injection kits used for treating severe allergic reactions to food or insect stings, as well as acute asthma attacks, are being recalled because the drug may not work.
The kits contain epinephrine, which is used to increase blood flow and restore breathing to people who suffer severe allergic reactions. Yesterday, American Home Products Corp., which supplies the drug, said quality-control tests found samples that weren't potent enough, posing a danger to consumers.
The recall involves kits sold under various names: Insect-Sting Treatment Kit, the Hollister-Stier Ana-Kit and Ana-Guard. The Madison drug maker said the kits should be returned to hospitals, clinics or pharmacies where they were purchased.
"We encourage those who depend on these kits to err on the side of caution," said Philip de Vane, vice president of clinical affairs at Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories, the American Home division that markets the drug.
The recall is the latest in a string of setbacks for American Home. Earlier this summer, shipments of Rotashield, a new vaccine for infant diarrhea, were halted after the Centers for Disease Prevention and Control learned of 20 cases of serious intestinal problems related to the vaccine.
Last year, the company recalled its Duract heart drug. And two years ago, American Home withdrew two diet drugs -- Redux and Pondimin, which was one-half of the fen-phen weight-loss combination.
More than 4,100 lawsuits have been filed over the diet drugs, including one large class-action lawsuit now under way in state court in New Brunswick. A federal class-action lawsuit was just certified last week.
Also last week, American Home moved to resolve a slew of lawsuits involving its Norplant contraceptive by agreeing to a $50 million settlement with some 36,000 consumers.
The spate of bad news, which includes a disappointing performance by the company's agricultural and chemical business, has sent the company's shares plummeting this year. Yesterday, the stock closed at 411/2, down 1/2.
The Associated Press contributed to this article.
-----
Visit New Jersey Online, the World Wide Web site of The Star-Ledger, at http://www.nj.com/newsCopyright 1999 Star-Ledger, provided by Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News.Copyright 1999 Star-Ledger, provided by Knight-Ridder/Tribune Business News.330
 Load-Date: January 16, 2005

 

End of Document


Diet drug maker expects little long-term effect from drug recall
September 29, 1997, Monday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 543 words
Byline: By JOHN HENDREN, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




American Home Products executives said Monday the recall of two diet drugs has prompted 21 class action lawsuits from dieters, but they also said the law is on the drug maker's side.
The Madison, N.J.-based consumer products giant did receive 11 "adverse drug reports" on the diet drugs Redux and Pondimin, out of 6 million users, before a Mayo Clinic report linked the drugs to heart problems in May. But the reports from patients were "very isolated and very scattered," company general counsel Louis L. Hoynes Jr. told analysts at a meeting in New York.
The company said it should have little to fear from the class-action suits and dozens more filed by individuals because the company had no duty to warn patients of side-effects of which it knew nothing.
"The law does not impose a duty to warn about an unknown and unintended risk," Hoynes said. "We will proceed knowing that we have always acted responsibly and in a timely manner."
The company recalled the drugs earlier this month at the request of the Food and Drug Administration, forcing thousands of dieters nationwide to alter their weight-loss regimens.
Analysts say the company's legal exposure is probably limited. Most of the claims come from those who took Pondimin, generically called fenfluramine, with the drug phentermine, a combination known as "fen-phen" that was neither approved by the FDA nor promoted by the company, the company said.
Pondimin had been on the market since 1973 in the United States. Redux, or dexfenfluramine, was used in Europe for 10 years, although it was only approved in the United States in mid-1996.
The company pointed out that the Mayo study did not show that the drugs caused heart damage, only that a statistical link may exist.
Several analysts have urged investors to buy the stock. The company has already earned half of the $ 400 million analysts at Salomon Brothers had expected the company's Wyeth-Ayerst division to earn on the obesity drugs this year.
But even if the company is found to be responsible, its penalty is unlikely to go much beyond the $ 2.8 billion settlement it reached for patients who used the Dalkon Shield birth control device, said Mariola Haggar, an analyst at Deutsche Morgan Grenfell. The company could raise that amount by using its estimated $ 1 billion in product liability insurance, $ 1 billion in cash reserves, $ 2 billion it could garner by selling its medical devices division, she said.
The company has no further plans to market an obesity drug, and sent one candidate back into early development after it failed to show satisfactory results, said Robert I. Levy, president of Wyeth-Ayerst, a division of American Home.
And Unlike Servier, which markets Redux in Europe, American Home Products does not foresee putting Redux and Pondimin back on the market - even if it is cleared of the suspected side-effects in future tests - said John R. Stafford, AHP's chairman, president and chief executive officer.
American Home estimates the drug recall will cost it $ 300 million before taxes. Without that, earnings would have grown 10 percent in the third quarter and 12 to 13 percent for the year. The recall is expected to cost 10 cents a share for the year, lowering analysts 1997 earnings estimates to about $ 3.34 per share.
 Load-Date: September 30, 1997

 

End of Document


German Company Recalling AIDS Test Drug Worldwide With BC-Japan-AIDS Teste
Associated Press Worldstream
October 23, 1994; Sunday 12:31 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International news
Length: 475 words
Dateline: BERLIN
Body




A German company is recalling a drug used in testing for the AIDS virus in many countries after it failed in one case to detect the virus in a person donating blood, the company said Sunday.
The drug is called Enzygnost and is distributed by Behring, a subsidiary of Hoechst, one of Germany's biggest drug companies.
Behring spokesman Wolfgang Faust said German pharmaceutical authorities withdrew the license for the drug and a worldwide recall action began on Oct. 15 without any announcement to the public.
The recall applied to 35 countries, and the United States was not on the list, Faust said.
The news emerged Sunday in Japan where the national newspaper Yomiuri reported that the Japanese Health and Welfare Ministry was asking for more information so it can decide whether to request further testing for people who tested negative for AIDS with Enzygnost.
Yomiuri said the amount sold in Japan was enough for 150,000 tests and about 80 percent of it had been used.
Faust said extensive retesting would not be necessary and only one problem case had turned up on the drug, which had been in use since 1991.
''There is no reason to panic,'' he told The Associated Press from Marburg, Behring's base.
Faust said the recall stemmed from a case in Munich where a blood donor tested negative for the HIV virus that causes AIDS.  That happened in June, Faust said, but then the person was tested again in September and the result was positive.
The June blood sample was then tested with another drug and the result was positive, he said.
Faust said the diagnostic failure was partly to be explained by the gap between when a person is infected with HIV and when it can be detected in blood, which can be as long as 6 to 12 weeks.
But he said Behring had applied already to license an improved AIDS test drug and Enzygnost had become an obsolete product.
Contaminated blood products are one path to spread the deadly virus, along with sexual intercourse and drug abuse with contaminated needles.
Germany was hit by an AIDS scare last fall when it was learned that two blood products companies had distributed plasma that had been inadequately tested. The manager of one company and four assistants are on trial charged with attempting to commit bodily injury, and prosecutors say at least three people contracted AIDS from the contaminated blood products.
German health authorities were criticized for reacting slowly to reports that some blood products firms were not acting properly, and the government set up a fund to pay compensation to AIDS patients infected by such blood products.
About 1 percent of Germany's 60,000 people who have been infected got the virus from blood products. About 6,000 have died of AIDS in Germany.
(lt)
    (PROFILE
    (WS SL:BC-Germany-Aids Tester; CT:i;
    (REG:EURO;)
    (REG:BRIT;)
    (REG:SCAN;)
    (REG:ENGL;)
    (REG:ASIA;))
    )
 Load-Date: October 23, 1994

 

End of Document


DRUG RECALLED AFTER DOSAGE ERROR
Press Association
April 5, 1997, Saturday

 Copyright 1997 The Press Association Limited
Section: HOME NEWS
Length: 289 words
Byline: Roger Williams, PA News
Body




A batch of 70,000 bottles of an anti-allergy drug used by adults and children were recalled by the makers because the instructions suggested too high a dosage.  The single batch of Phenergan Elixir 100 millilitre bottles has a printing error on carton, label and patient information leaflet, said Dr Martin Ford, medical director of Franco-American pharmaceutical firm Rhone-Poulenc Rorer.
The higher-than-recommended dosing could lead to "excitation, hallucinations and incoordination of movement" as well as drowsiness, he said.  He urged customers to check the batch number printed on the top flap of the carton and the side of the bottle label. If it was LOT 7B357 they should return it to the pharmacist.  Phenergan, on the market for more than 40 years, was a widely-used antihistamine available over pharmacists' counters but also often prescribed, he said.  It was used by children from the age of two, and adults, mainly for allergic conditions and to treat vomiting, and to a lesser extent as a short-term sedative.  The wrongly printed instructions suggested doses "significantly" higher than recommended, though the degree varied with individual treatment requirements, he said.  The batch had been with wholesalers for several weeks, and it was not yet known how many had reached users. Wholesalers and pharmacists had been asked to return all those in stock.  The contents of the affected bottles were safe in themselves, but high doses could lead to "marked drowsiness and possible combinations of excitation, hallucinations and incoordination of movement", said Dr Ford.  Anyone who believed an excessive dose may have been given in the last 24 hours should contact a doctor immediately for advice, he said.
 Load-Date: April 5, 1997

 

End of Document


CONGRESS TOLD PROZAC CAUSES SUICIDE, DRUG RECALL URGED
PR Newswire
July 26, 1990, Thursday - 12:53 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1990 PR Newswire Association, Inc.
Length: 450 words
Dateline: BOSTON, July 26
Body




BOSTON, July 26 /PRN/ -- Prozac, a widely-used psychiatric
drug, can create violence, suicide and permanent, disfiguring
neurological damage in persons taking the drug, a national watchdog
group told Congress today.
    The charges came in a submission presented by the Citizens
Commission on Human Rights (CCHR) to the House Energy and Commerce
Commission, chaired by John Dingell (D-MI), documenting false claims
in Prozac advertisements and calling for an immediate recall of the drug
from the market.
    According to the submission, advertising for Prozac has created
an image that the drug is virtually side effect-free when the drug
has actually accumulated a staggering number of reports of harmful
effects in a very short period of time.
  The report cites numerous cases of persons who were driven suicidal
or homicidal after starting on Proxac, including Joseph Wesbecker,
the mass murderer who killed eight in Louisville, Ky., last September.
Wesbecker had a high therapeutic level of Prozac in his blood at
the time of the murder-suicide, and the coroner's inquest into the
deaths ruled that Prozac may have been a factor.
    Last week, a New York woman sued Eli Lilly, the manufacturer of
Prozac, for $150 million charging that the drug drove her to several
suicide attempts and caused her to slash herself more than 100 times.
    A medical study conducted at Harvard Medical School released
in February showed that Prozac created intense, violent suicidal
thoughts in 3.5 percent of persons in the study group.  CCHR charges
that phychiatrists ignore this warning, and then cash in on health
insurance plans and other resouces by giving destructive psychiatric
treatments for the Prozac-induced mental problems which follow use
of the drug.
    "Despite the proven connection of Prozac to violent suicidal
intentions, and despite tragic murders and suicides committed by
people on Prozac, the manufacturer continues to ignore this threat
in its promotion and psychiatrists continue to profit by its use.
This is criminal conduct which demands investigation," said CCHR
National Director Sanford Block.
    "We have presented our information to the Energy and Commerce
Committee so they can incorporate it into their ongoing scrutiny
of Eli Lilly," Block said.
    Block pointed to Lilly's previous release of an arthritis medication
which was removed from the market after killing 100 people, as clear
evidence that the drug company cannot be trusted with the health
of Americans.
    The Citizens Commission on Human Rights was established by the
Church of Scientology in 1969 to investigate and expose psychiatric
violations of human rights.
CONTACT -- Michael Lashaway, 202-328-1638 or Michael O'Brien,
213-667-2901, both of CCHR

 

End of Document


DRUG RECALLED AFTER DOSAGE ERROR
Press Association
April 4, 1997, Friday

 Copyright 1997 The Press Association Limited
Section: HOME NEWS
Length: 291 words
Byline: Roger Williams, PA News
Body




A batch of 70,000 bottles of an anti-allergy drug used by adults and children were recalled by the makers tonight because the instructions suggested too high a dosage.  The single batch of Phenergan Elixir 100 millilitre bottles has a printing error on carton, label and patient information leaflet, said Dr Martin Ford, medical director of Franco-American pharmaceutical firm Rhone-Poulenc Rorer.
The higher-than-recommended dosing could lead to "excitation, hallucinations and incoordination of movement" as well as drowsiness, he said.  He urged customers to check the batch number printed on the top flap of the carton and the side of the bottle label. If it was LOT 7B357 they should return it to the pharmacist.  Phenergan, on the market for more than 40 years, was a widely-used antihistamine available over pharmacists' counters but also often prescribed, he said.  It was used by children from the age of two, and adults, mainly for allergic conditions and to treat vomiting, and to a lesser extent as a short-term sedative.  The wrongly printed instructions suggested doses "significantly" higher than recommended, though the degree varied with individual treatment requirements, he said.  The batch had been with wholesalers for several weeks, and it was not yet known how many had reached users. Wholesalers and pharmacists had been asked to return all those in stock.  The contents of the affected bottles were safe in themselves, but high doses could lead to "marked drowsiness and possible combinations of excitation, hallucinations and incoordination of movement", said Dr Ford.  Anyone who believed an excessive dose may have been given in the last 24 hours should contact a doctor immediately for advice, he said.
 Load-Date: April 4, 1997

 

End of Document


FED: BLOOD PRESSURE DRUG RECALLED
AAP NEWSFEED
June 12, 1998, Friday

 Copyright 1998 AAP Information Services Pty. Ltd.
Section: Nationwide General News; Australian General News
Length: 368 words
Body




SYDNEY, June 12 AAP - Australian doctors have been urged to stop issuing prescriptions for a new drug that treats high blood pressure and angina, because of safety concerns.
 About 20,000 doctors across the country were advised in a letter from drugs manufacturer Roche Australia of the voluntary withdrawal of Posicor, also known as mibefradil.
 The Swiss pharmaceuticals giant fears a combination of Posicor and other commonly used drugs, such as cardiovascular agents, will increase the frequency of side effects.
Posicor could affect the metabolism of some drugs, raising their concentrations, causing a slowed heart rate and, rarely, muscle pain and damage.
 Roche estimates 10,000 Australians and about 400,000 worldwide take Posicor daily.
 Company medical director David Kingston said drug interactions could in principle be addressed by appropriate labelling but the complexity of prescribing such information for Posicor was too difficult.
 He said Posicor taken with the drugs Astemizole and Terfenadine, both antihistamines, and Cisapride, for nausea and gastric reflux, was a cause for concern.
 "We know of the potential of these interactions, these could include a slowing in the heart rate and a very rare case of muscle pain and damage," Dr Kingston said.
 Roche has set up an information hotline and has urged patients to keep taking Posicor until they consult their doctor for a replacement treatment.
 "We urge all doctors to see their patients and change them to some other treatment," Dr Kingston said.
 "Posicor users shouldn't suddenly stop taking it, they should continue taking it until they see their doctor for other treatment," he said.
 In the letter to doctors, Roche said "the decision to withdraw Posicor was unavoidable as patient well-being was the highest priority".
 The federal Health Department's Adverse Drug Reactions Advisory Committee had received 34 reports of adverse reactions to the drug in the six months to May, with the most common complaint a slowing heartbeat.
 Posicor was approved in Australia last November but had been used in clinical trials for some years.
 The Roche information hotline number is 1800 771 444.
 Load-Date: June 12, 1998

 

End of Document


Judge dumps lawsuit claiming executives profited before drug recall
The Associated Press
February 10, 1999, Wednesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 217 words
Byline: By JEFFREY GOLD, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: NEWARK, N.J.
Body




A federal judge has dismissed a lawsuit charging that drug company executives benefited from inside information about problems with two popular diet drugs that have been recalled.
The class-action suit from shareholders alleged that American Home Products hid the troubles with Redux and Pondimin while the executives sold nearly $ 25 million in stock.
U.S. District Judge Nicholas Politan ruled Friday the case was not strong enough to sustain charges that AHP improperly withheld damaging medical data before the September 1997 recall. Politan noted that the company's stock rose after the problems were made public two months earlier, and only fell after the recall was announced.
Thousands of damage suits are still pending against AHP, alleging that the diet drugs caused heart valve damage. AHP, based in Madison, said the suit dismissed by Politan is the only one claiming securities fraud.
Shareholder lawyer Marian Rosner said Tuesday that her team is likely to appeal. Company spokesman Lowell Weiner said the company was pleased with the decision.
Politan ruled that the company did not mislead investors by not disclosing that information before July 1997, noting that at the time, medical authorities had said the findings raised questions but were inconclusive and required comprehensive study.
 Load-Date: February 10, 1999

 

End of Document


Dieters upset over recall of wonder drugs
October 23, 1997, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 676 words
Byline: By EUN-KYUNG KIM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Maria Checkley used to wake up longing for breakfast. At breakfast, she couldn't stop thinking about lunch. By noon, dinner was already planned.
Enter Redux, a diet drug that left her moody, dizzy and running to the bathroom with diarrhea - but also helped her drop 25 pounds and ended her obsession to the point she often forgot to eat.
"My husband would come home at lunch time and ask me what I had for breakfast and I'd have to think. I'd look in the trash to see if there was any clue," said Checkley, a 30-year-old mother of three from Fort Walton Beach, Fla. "I'd look in the dishwasher for a dirty bowl and say, 'Gosh, I did eat."'
So Checkley panicked when, 30 pounds shy of her ideal weight, manufacturers pulled Redux off the market along with fenfluramine, the "fen" in the popular diet cocktail known as "fen-phen," after the Food and Drug Administration and others raised health concerns.
She sought support from an Internet news group for dieters, posting a note asking, "Can I do it without Redux?"
She wasn't the only one. Dieters desperate to shed pounds, who marveled at the willpower they gained while on Redux and fenfluramine, are now scrambling for alternatives.
Some eyeball herbal remedies. Others contemplate alternative diet drug combinations including "phen-pro," which substitutes the anti-depressant Prozac for fenfluramine.
Many are furious over the negative attention showered on Redux and fenfluramine, even though researchers note they were pulled because of potentially life-threatening side effects.
Comparatively little fuss, these dieters argue, is being made over how the drugs finally brought success to thousands of dieters who failed to lose weight through more traditional methods.
"They're mad, plain mad, fighting mad," said Dr. Denise Bruner, president-elect of the American Society of Bariatric Physicians. "They want to call up the lawyers up and say, 'What happens when WE die of obesity?"'
Doctors should warn upset patients there are no quick fixes to keep pounds off permanently, she said.
"These drugs provided a way for people to see some hope and feel better about themselves," Bruner said. "But we need to keep helping people learn proper nutrition and learn to exercise and learn to drink their water.
"The whole point is, and people have got to understand this, there is no magic bullet in this deal."
All the frenzy over the search for alternatives worries Mary Ball, who has battled obesity all of her life and had been using fen-phen.
"The whole field of weight loss is open to shysterism," she said from the antique shop she runs in Leesburg, Va., "Folks are pitiful when trying to lose weight. They'll do anything."
For Ball, 54, the diet drugs were no cure-all, but they did help her shed pounds and ultimately keep her weight steady. That, in turn, helped reduce her blood pressure and cholesterol and encouraged her to start water aerobics.
Since going off the drugs cold turkey, Ball has begun exercising more and started a liquid protein-based diet to maintain her current weight.
"Nothing's a miracle drug. If it was a miracle drug I'd weigh 135 pounds now," Ball said.
The drugs may not have been a miracle, but they were the next best thing for Checkley, who said she never would have lost 25 pounds had it not been for Redux.
"I know I couldn't have, because I certainly have tried," said Checkley, who now weighs 165 pounds. "Those first 25 didn't come off because of me. They came off because the drugs gave me the ability to not scarf."
A few years ago Checkley skipped her high school reunion because she was too embarrassed by her weight. Until recently, she hated going for walks outside.
"I thought people would be driving by and making comments about how big my behind is, so I just didn't have the courage to do it," she said. Checkley now walks two to three miles several a times a week, often with her husband and children.
She has not gained any weight since coming off Redux but she hasn't lost any either. She now wants to talk to her doctor about other medical alternatives, including phen-pro.
 Load-Date: October 23, 1997

 

End of Document


Dieters Upset Over Drug Recall
Associated Press Online
October 23, 1997; Thursday 02:33 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic, non-Washington, general news item
Length: 681 words
Byline: EUN-KYUNG KIM 
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Maria Checkley used to wake up longing for breakfast. At breakfast, she couldn't stop thinking about lunch. By noon, dinner was already planned.
Enter Redux, a diet drug that left her moody, dizzy and running to the bathroom with diarrhea but also helped her drop 25 pounds and ended her obsession to the point she often forgot to eat.
''My husband would come home at lunch time and ask me what I had for breakfast and I'd have to think. I'd look in the trash to see if there was any clue,'' said Checkley, a 30-year-old mother of three from Fort Walton Beach, Fla. ''I'd look in the dishwasher for a dirty bowl and say, 'Gosh, I did eat.'''
So Checkley panicked when, 30 pounds shy of her ideal weight, manufacturers pulled Redux off the market along with fenfluramine, the ''fen'' in the popular diet cocktail known as ''fen-phen,'' after the Food and Drug Administration and others raised health concerns.
She sought support from an Internet news group for dieters, posting a note asking, ''Can I do it without Redux?''
She wasn't the only one. Dieters desperate to shed pounds, who marveled at the willpower they gained while on Redux and fenfluramine, are now scrambling for alternatives.
Some eyeball herbal remedies. Others contemplate alternative diet drug combinations including ''phen-pro,'' which substitutes the anti-depressant Prozac for fenfluramine.
Many are furious over the negative attention showered on Redux and fenfluramine, even though researchers note they were pulled because of potentially life-threatening side effects.
Comparatively little fuss, these dieters argue, is being made over how the drugs finally brought success to thousands of dieters who failed to lose weight through more traditional methods.
''They're mad, plain mad, fighting mad,'' said Dr. Denise Bruner, president-elect of the American Society of Bariatric Physicians. ''They want to call up the lawyers up and say, 'What happens when WE die of obesity?'''
Doctors should warn upset patients there are no quick fixes to keep pounds off permanently, she said.
''These drugs provided a way for people to see some hope and feel better about themselves,'' Bruner said. ''But we need to keep helping people learn proper nutrition and learn to exercise and learn to drink their water.
''The whole point is, and people have got to understand this, there is no magic bullet in this deal.''
All the frenzy over the search for alternatives worries Mary Ball, who has battled obesity all of her life and had been using fen-phen.
''The whole field of weight loss is open to shysterism,'' she said from the antique shop she runs in Leesburg, Va., ''Folks are pitiful when trying to lose weight. They'll do anything.''
For Ball, 54, the diet drugs were no cure-all, but they did help her shed pounds and ultimately keep her weight steady. That, in turn, helped reduce her blood pressure and cholesterol and encouraged her to start water aerobics.
Since going off the drugs cold turkey, Ball has begun exercising more and started a liquid protein-based diet to maintain her current weight.
''Nothing's a miracle drug. If it was a miracle drug I'd weigh 135 pounds now,'' Ball said.
The drugs may not have been a miracle, but they were the next best thing for Checkley, who said she never would have lost 25 pounds had it not been for Redux.
''I know I couldn't have, because I certainly have tried,'' said Checkley, who now weighs 165 pounds. ''Those first 25 didn't come off because of me. They came off because the drugs gave me the ability to not scarf.''
A few years ago Checkley skipped her high school reunion because she was too embarrassed by her weight. Until recently, she hated going for walks outside.
''I thought people would be driving by and making comments about how big my behind is, so I just didn't have the courage to do it,'' she said. Checkley now walks two to three miles several a times a week, often with her husband and children.
She has not gained any weight since coming off Redux but she hasn't lost any either. She now wants to talk to her doctor about other medical alternatives, including phen-pro.
 Load-Date: October 23, 1997

 

End of Document


Dieters upset over recall of diet drugs
October 23, 1997, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 676 words
Byline: By EUN-KYUNG KIM, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Maria Checkley used to wake up longing for breakfast. At breakfast, she couldn't stop thinking about lunch. By noon, dinner was already planned.
Enter Redux, a diet drug that left her moody, dizzy and running to the bathroom with diarrhea - but also helped her drop 25 pounds and ended her obsession to the point she often forgot to eat.
"My husband would come home at lunch time and ask me what I had for breakfast and I'd have to think. I'd look in the trash to see if there was any clue," said Checkley, a 30-year-old mother of three from Fort Walton Beach, Fla. "I'd look in the dishwasher for a dirty bowl and say, 'Gosh, I did eat."'
So Checkley panicked when, 30 pounds shy of her ideal weight, manufacturers pulled Redux off the market along with fenfluramine, the "fen" in the popular diet combination known as "fen-phen," after the Food and Drug Administration and others raised health concerns.
She sought support from an Internet news group for dieters, posting a note asking, "Can I do it without Redux?"
She wasn't the only one. Dieters desperate to shed pounds, who marveled at the willpower they gained while on Redux and fenfluramine, are now scrambling for alternatives.
Some eyeball herbal remedies. Others contemplate alternative diet drug combinations including "phen-pro," which substitutes the anti-depressant Prozac for fenfluramine.
Many are furious over the negative attention showered on Redux and fenfluramine, even though researchers note they were pulled because of potentially life-threatening side effects.
Comparatively little fuss, these dieters argue, is being made over how the drugs finally brought success to thousands of dieters who failed to lose weight through more traditional methods.
"They're mad, plain mad, fighting mad," said Dr. Denise Bruner, president-elect of the American Society of Bariatric Physicians. "They want to call up the lawyers up and say, 'What happens when WE die of obesity?"'
Doctors should warn upset patients there are no quick fixes to keep pounds off permanently, she said.
"These drugs provided a way for people to see some hope and feel better about themselves," Bruner said. "But we need to keep helping people learn proper nutrition and learn to exercise and learn to drink their water.
"The whole point is, and people have got to understand this, there is no magic bullet in this deal."
All the frenzy over the search for alternatives worries Mary Ball, who has battled obesity all her life and had been using fen-phen.
"The whole field of weight loss is open to shysterism," she said from the antique shop she runs in Leesburg, Va., "Folks are pitiful when trying to lose weight. They'll do anything."
For Ball, 54, the diet drugs were no cure-all, but they did help her shed pounds and ultimately keep her weight steady. That, in turn, helped reduce her blood pressure and cholesterol and encouraged her to start water aerobics.
Since going off the drugs cold turkey, Ball has begun exercising more and started a liquid protein-based diet to maintain her current weight.
"Nothing's a miracle drug. If it was a miracle drug I'd weigh 135 pounds now," Ball said.
The drugs may not have been a miracle, but they were the next best thing for Checkley, who said she never would have lost 25 pounds had it not been for Redux.
"I know I couldn't have, because I certainly have tried," said Checkley, who now weighs 165 pounds. "Those first 25 didn't come off because of me. They came off because the drugs gave me the ability to not scarf."
A few years ago Checkley skipped her high school reunion because she was too embarrassed by her weight. Until recently, she hated going for walks outside.
"I thought people would be driving by and making comments about how big my behind is, so I just didn't have the courage to do it," she said. Checkley now walks two to three miles several a times a week, often with her husband and children.
She has not gained any weight since coming off Redux but she hasn't lost any either. She now wants to talk to her doctor about other medical alternatives, including phen-pro.
 Load-Date: October 23, 1997

 

End of Document


SWIM: CHINA RECALLS SWIMMER AFTER DRUG SEIZURE
AAP NEWSFEED
January 09, 1998, Friday

 Copyright 1998 AAP Information Services Pty. Ltd.
Section: Nationwide General News; Sport (Domestic)
Length: 952 words
Byline: By AAP Correspondents
Body




 PERTH, Jan 9 AAP - The threat of a Chinese team withdrawal hung over the world swimming championships here tonight after one of its swimmers was recalled home as tests confirmed banned human growth hormones had been found in her luggage.
 "There is a possibility they may not even compete," World Swimming Coaches Association president Peter Daland said.
 "I don't know what the answer is but I know that is a strong possibility.
 "I understand that somebody from the (Chinese) consulate is here and why would someone from the consulate be here?"
Earlier, the Chinese Embassy in Canberra announced the recall as laboratory tests in Sydney established breastroker Yuan Yuan had been carrying vials of a performance-enhancing human growth hormone when she arrived at Sydney airport yesterday.
 Australian Customs initially said it was unable to determine the type of hormone, but later confirmed it was a human growth hormone.
 "As a disciplinary measure, the Chinese Swimming Association (CSA) has decided to send the above-mentioned member back to China, who might receive a penalty according to relevant regulations in case the evidence turns out against her," the embassy said in a statement.
 Australian head coach Don Talbot described the Chinese action as damage control.
 "I think they took that initiative themselves to send a swimmer home before the bomb's dropped on them," Talbot said.
 He slammed swimming's world body FINA over its apparent inaction over the issue.
 "If they're trying to claim that it is out of their jurisdiction, they're waffling.
 "They're not leading here. We've got leaders who want to lead from behind."
 Customs Minister Warren Truss said tests on samples from 13 vials found by customs officers were carried out by the Australian Government Analytical Laboratories and by a specialist hormone laboratory at Sydney's St Vincent's Hospital.
 "Customs testing has shown that samples taken from the vials contain a growth hormone - a prohibited import," said a spokesman for Mr Truss.
 "Tests will be conducted as to the type, but they will take several days. We can't confirm the brand name at this stage."
 The spokesman said Customs would consider what action was to be taken.
 Yuan's coach, Zhou Zhewen, would also be ordered home, Agence France Presse reported from Beijing.    FINA said it would wait to see what penalty China imposed before
 deciding on possible action against Yuan, 21, a 1994 Rome world championship breaststroke silver medallist.
 "There's no reason for us to interfere if they take the necessary steps under FINA rules," said FINA secretary Gunnar Werner. "This happened while the Chinese were in Sydney. They were not under FINA jurisdiction at the time."
 The Chinese embassy said Yuan's recall was a clear indication of the firm anti-doping attitude of the CSA.
 However, it took a swipe at allegations being levelled against Chinese swimmers in general.
 "We are of the view that before the evidence is achieved, any accusations against Chinese athletes are totally irresponsible," it said.
 The CSA earlier rejected calls in Australia for its entire team to be expelled from the world championships, being held in Perth.
 Earlier today officials from the Australian Sports Drug Agency went to the Chinese team's Perth hotel to carry out routine drug tests on a number of swimmers, sources said.
 The seizure continued to cause shock waves in world swimming today and Talbot said drug-taking was more widespread in the sport than was imagined.
 "It's much more rife than even our wildest imagination can say," Talbot said.
 Chinese swimmers at the centre of the controversy were escorted by police to training in Perth today as their senior officials met with the world swimming body FINA, which would decide on any punishment.
 Talbot said the incident had caught FINA unawares, but the response of the world swimming body could prove a turning point in its fight against drugs.
 "I believe it is a positive if we're going to really find out whether FINA is paying lip service to what they say they're doing or whether they're really seriously thinking about doing something for the sport to clean it up," he said.
 An Australian Olympic medical expert said proof that Chinese swimmers had brought human growth hormones to Australia would have as much impact on sport as the positive drug test on athlete Ben Johnson in 1988.
 "I think this could have huge ramifications particularly for China, but also for the whole world of doping, because it brings a new concept to doping," Professor Ken Fitch, a member of the International Olympic Committee's medical commission, told ABC radio.
 "And that is there are other ways of cheating on these illicit drugs and that is the illicit importation into another country where a competition is being held."
 Crusading anti-doping swimming coach Forbes Carlile and former world champion Tracey Wickham have called for the Chinese team to be expelled from the world championships.
 Their comments angered the CSA, with spokeswoman Xue Li responding: "What has been said is unjust. Every country has had drug cases, including Australia.
 "We are very surprised and shocked by this discovery and if it is confirmed that it is an illegal substance we will sanction the guilty person or persons according to FINA regulations," said Xue.
 Federal Sports Minister Andrew Thomson said the incident was a tragedy for sport.
 "Any athlete of any national team representing the country, whether Australian, Chinese or anyone who is caught with a banned substance is of great tragedy for sport generally," Mr Thomson told AAP.
 Load-Date: January 9, 1998

 

End of Document


ATTACK RECALLS ERA OF DRUG WARS
Daily News (New York)
June 25, 1996, Tuesday

 Copyright 1996 Daily News, L.P.
Section: News; Pg.  4
Length: 736 words
Byline: BY JIM DWYER
Body




ONE afternoon, Audubon Willie took an order for six assault rifles at his home on Audubon Ave. in Washington Heights.
"I am in this to make money," Willie told his buyers.
His wife counted out the cash and Willie left his home, a fifth-floor apartment near 182d St. That is down the block from the Cross Bronx Expressway and ramps to the whole world.
"The most prolific gun dealer of his time in Washington Heights," said Dan Rather Jr., a Manhattan prosecutor. "As a neighbor, he was a very quiet man, kept to himself."
Audubon Willie drove north that day to the Yonkers Raceway, scene of a big gun show, and bought six assault rifles from an exhibitor. He carried them back to the fifth-floor apartment. Not only a dealer, but a craftsman, Audubon Willie customized the guns to his customers' specifications.
In the apartment, he had a circular saw, a drill press and a worktable, along with filing gadgets. He cut down the barrels of the rifles and smoothed the ends.
"A regular gunsmith," said Rather. "If you had a gun that had been used in a homicide, Willie would switch the barrel, so the markings and riflings would be different if the gun were ever picked up. He also had some very nasty pieces. He sold our undercover a Calico machine pistol. It's like a Tommy gun, except it's a pistol."
Audubon Willie, 35, married, father of young children, went to court under his legal name, Guillermo Tejada. He pleaded guilty and ended up with a sentence of five years.
Yesterday afternoon, a good young cop, Andrew DeStefano, went into an apartment house at W. 171st St. The super had complained about gun dealing and drug dealing. DeStefano, in uniform, apparently ran into one of the gun sellers in the lobby and was shot. Fortunately, he was wearing a bulletproof vest.
The shooting of DeStefano replays a bad time in upper Manhattan. About five years ago, District Attorney Robert Morgenthau started breaking up drug gangs from Harlem and Washington Heights. Today, there are fewer homicides in Manhattan than in 1961.
The retail gun dealer or whoever shot DeStefano comes hissing like a spent balloon of the drug wars. Besides Audubon Willie, the police mention two big names in street gun sales: Mohammed the Chicken Man and Crazy Raymond.
Mohammed the Chicken Man is Fareedullah Nawabi, an Afhgan who ran a Mama's Fried Chicken on Boston Post Road in the Bronx, just north of Parkchester.
It was a takeout gun and drug distributorship. "A favorite of the Wild Cowboys," says Rather. At the slideout window, with the right introduction, everything from machine guns to bricks of heroin could be collected. Nawabi is now doing 17 years.
Crazy Raymond is the nickname of Raymond Polanco, who has been convicted of nothing and has pleaded innocent in court to everything. The Wild Cowboys said he was their gun supplier. Five years ago, a young college kid home for the holidays drove up the West Side Highway. He sat in a pickup truck with his friends and an amplifier blaring.
In a car behind them was Lenny Sepulveda, the new owner of an Uzi machine gun that he claimed to have bought from Crazy Raymond. Sepulveda looked at the pickup truck, and someone in Sepulveda's car called:
"Light them up."
Which meant: Shoot them. When Sepulveda pulled the trigger, the Uzi jammed. Conveniently, at the wheel of the car was the dealer who sold him the Uzi, one Raymond Polanco, according to Sepulveda.
As Polanco steered up the West Side Highway with one hand, he unjammed the Uzi with the other. Again, Sepulveda pulled the trigger. Again, it jammed. This time, Sepulveda held the steering wheel, while Polanco unjammed the Uzi.
Near 155th St., Sepulveda pulled the trigger on his Uzi and splattered the pickup truck. Dead, in the back of the truck, was David Cargill, 20, of Tarrytown. Sepulveda was sent to prison a few years ago. Polanco was just recently arrested in a federal case.
The announcement yesterday by the Police Department that Officer DeStefano was shot while investigating a complaint by the superintendent of the building brings to mind the hard days of another super from the neighborhood.
Just down the street from the shooting, this former super is working in a restaurant, busing tables. The entire building was seized by the government. "You are between the law and the bad guys," said the man. "The people in the building kept wanting to say hello, and so did the feds. I said goodbye. It is easier to bus tables."
 Graphic



 
SUSAN STAVA QUICK RESPONSE: Cops guard entrance to apartment building on W. 171st St. where a cop was shot, but saved by his bulletproof vest.
 Load-Date: June 25, 1996

 

End of Document


SCIENTOLOGY TELLS CONGRESS PROZAC CAUSES SUICIDE; DRUG RECALL URGED
PR Newswire
July 26, 1990, Thursday - 17:33 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1990 PR Newswire Association, Inc.
Length: 458 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON, July 26
Body




WASHINGTON, July 26 /PRN/ -- Prozac, a widely-used
psychiatric drug, can create violence and cause suicide and
permanent, disfiguring neurological damage in persons taking the
drug, a national watchdog group told Congress today.
    The charges came in a submission presented by the Citizens
Commission on Human Rights (CCHR) to the House Energy and Commerce
Commission, chaired by John Dingell (D-Minn.).  The presentation
documented false claims in Prozac advertisements and called for an
immediate recall of the drug from the market.
  According to the submission, advertising for Prozac has created
an image that the drug is virtually side-effect free, when the drug
has actually accumulated a number of reports of harmful effects in a
short period of time.
    The report cites numerous cases of persons who were driven
suicidal or homicidal after starting on Prozac, including Joseph
Wesbecker, the mass murderer who killed eight persons in Louisville
last September.
    Wesbecker had a high therapeutic level of Prozac in his
blood at the time of the murder-suicide, and the coroner's inquest
into the deaths ruled that Prozac may have been a factor.
    Last week, a New York woman sued Eli Lilly, the manufacturer
of Prozac, for $150 million, charging that the drug drove her to
several suicide attempts and caused her to slash herself more than a
hundred times.
    A medical study conducted at Harvard Medical School and released
in February showed that Prozac crated intense, violent suicidal
thoughts in 3.5 percent of persons in the study group.  CCHR charges
that psychiatrists ignore this warning, then cash in on health
insurance plans and other resources by giving destructive psychiatric
treatments for the Prozac-induced mental problems that follow use of
the drug.
    "Despite the proven connection of Prozac to violent suicidal
intentions, and despite tragic murders and suicides committed by
people on Prozac, the manufacturer continues to ignore this threat in
its promotion and psychiatrists continue to profit by its use.  This
is criminal conduct which demands investigation," said CCHR National
Director Sanford Block.
    "We have presented our information to the Energy and Commerce
Committee so they can incorporate it into their ongoing scrutiny of
Eli Lilly," he said.
    Block pointed to Lilly's previous release of an arthritis
medication, which was removed from the market after killing 100
people, as clear evidence that the drug company cannot be trusted
with the health of Americans.
     The Citizens Commission on Human Rights was established by the
Church of Scientology in 1969 to investigate and expose psychiatric
violations of human rights.
CONTACT -- Michael Lashaway, 202-328-1638, or Michael O'Brien,
213-667-2901, both of Church of Scientology

 

End of Document


Anti-Depressant Drug Recalled Because Of Mislabeling
The Associated Press
March 29, 1990, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1990 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 298 words
Byline: By DEBORAH MESCE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The Food and Drug Administration said Thursday that two lots of an anti-depressant drug called desipramine are being recalled because some bottles may contain a blood-thinner that could cause serious bleeding.
The manufacturer, Pharmaceutical Basics Inc. of Denver, told the FDA it was recalling the products after distributor H.L. Moore of New Britain, Conn., found a mislabeled bottle of the drug earlier this week.
The bottle was labeled as containing 25 milligrams of desipramine, but it contained 5 milligram tabelets of warfarin, a blood-thinner.
The FDA said people taking the anti-depressant should examine their tablets to see if any are marked with the name warfarin.
Warfarin is a non-coated pink tablet with "5" on one side and "832" and the word "warfarin" on the other side.
Desipramine is a coated, lavender tablet with the numbers "832" and G254" imprinted on it.
Pharmaceutical Basics is notifying Moore's 350 customers by phone of the possible label mix-up, the FDA said.
The recall applies only to desipramine made by Pharmaceutical Basics for distribution by Moore. About six other manufacturers make despiramine.
The FDA said it is likely that pharmacists would catch mislabeled tablets because the two tablets are so different. However, the FDA said people who have filled or refilled a prescription for Moore's 25 milligram desipramine within the last six months should return the prescription to the pharmacy to be checked or replaced.
The lots being recalled are G873-01 and G685-08.
Carl Peck, director of the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, warned that if people taking four to eight tablets a day of desipramine took the same number of warfarin tablets, "in the worst case, they could experience severe bleeding, such as stomach or intracranial hemorrhage."

 

End of Document


Maker of allergy drug recalls emergency kits
Bangor Daily News (Maine)
September 1, 1999 Wednesday

 Copyright 1999 Bangor Daily News
Length: 316 words
Byline: Phil Galewitz The Associated Press
Body




NEW YORK -- More than a half-million emergency injection kits
for treating severe allergic reactions and asthma attacks are being
recalled in the United States and Canada because the drug may not
work.
The kits are routinely carried by people who are prone to acute
asthma attacks or have deadly allergies to certain foods or bee
stings, for example.  
Users inject themselves with epinephrine, also
known as adrenaline, to counter the reaction.
The maker of the epinephrine, American Home Products'
Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories, said Tuesday that routine
quality-control tests found that the drug was not as potent as it
was supposed to be.
The recall involves threekits: the Insect-Sting Treatment Kit
packaged and distributed by Derm/Buro Inc., and the Hollister
Stier-Ana-Kit and the Ana-Guard, both packaged and distributed by
Bayer Corp.
All of the kits are sold by prescription and cost about $ 40.
The kits should be returned to the hospital, clinic or pharmacy
where they were obtained, American Home said.
Philip de Vane, North American medical director for
Wyeth-Ayerst, said people should take no chances and should contact
their pharmacists or health care providers to determine whether
their kit is being recalled.
Consumers can call Wyeth-Ayerst at (800) 999-9384.
About 450,000 Ana-Kits and 55,000 Ana-Guards are being
recalled, said Kathleen Bauernschmidt, spokeswoman for
Hollister-Stier Laboratories of Spokane, Wash.  Bayer sold its
allergy kit manufacturing business to Hollister-Stier in June.  It
was unclear how many kits were being recalled by Derm/Buro.
People who are prone to allergic reactions can suffer what is
known as anaphylactic shock, in which swelling of the airways can
cut off breathing and the heart can stop.  Epinephrine, a naturally
occurring hormone, is used to increase blood flow and restore
breathing.
 Load-Date: September 1, 1999

 

End of Document


Second Generic High Blood Pressure Drug Recalled
The Associated Press
February 1, 1990, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1990 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 619 words
Byline: By DEBORAH MESCE, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




The head of a House investigations subcommittee wants the government to ensure that a lower-priced medicine for high blood pressure is available, now that both generic versions of a widely used anti-hypertension drug are off the market.
 
 The second of two generic versions of SmithKline Beecham's Dyazide was recalled Wednesday by its maker, Bolar Pharmaceutical Co. Inc., which is under fire for allegedly giving false test data to the Food and Drug Administration.
Bolar also said it was recalling its 100 milligram extended-release phenytoin sodium capsules, a generic version of the epilepsy drug Dilantin made by Parke-Davis.
The company said "the products' bioequivalence (to the brand-name drugs) cannot be assured in light of serious questions concerning the accuracy and reliability of the documentation" supporting FDA approval of Bolar's drugs.
The FDA said patients taking the two generic drugs being recalled "should consult with their physicians and are urged not to stop taking either medication abruptly."
The agency advised patients taking Bolar's generic Dyazide to continue taking the drug until their prescription runs out and to arrange with their physicians to take another medication. Patients on Bolar's phenytoin should consult with their physician "in the next few days" about changing drugs, it said.
Rep. John Dingell, D-Mich., chairman of the House Energy and Commerce investigations subcommittee, said in a letter to FDA Acting Commissioner James Benson, "unfortunately, the consumer stands to be the principal victim."
Dingell said he asked SmithKline Beecham, maker of Dyazide, to cut the price of its product when allegations against the makers of its generic competitors surfaced. The company raised the price of Dyazide after Bolar's generic version came on the market in 1987.
In the absence of a price cut, Dingell said, the FDA should consider several options, including requiring SmithKline to reformulate the drug so that it is easier to copy in a generic form.
Jeremy Heymsfeld, a spokesman for SmithKline Beecham, said Bolar's recall "represents a significant change in the marketplace. We have not seen Congressman Dingell's statement. We take seriously our responsibilities to all our publics: our shareholders, our customers and the patients who use our products. We plan to respond accordingly."
Dingell said, "For the millions of Americans without health insurance or those with minimal prescription drug reimbursement plans, the cost of a drug which is the most common treatment for high blood pressure is critical."
Dingell worried that "price considerations may cause many to discontinue the treatment without consulting their physician."
Last spring, Vitarine Pharmaceuticals of Springfield Gardens, N.Y., took its version of Dyazide off the market after it admitted cheating on FDA tests.
The FDA had been trying to remove Bolar's generic Dyazide, a combination of triamterene and hydrochlorothiazide, from the market because of questions about its therapeutic equivalence to the brand-name drug.
Last week, lawyers representing Bolar told the FDA the company appeared to have used false documents to challenge FDA action against the company's generic Dyazide.
Two days after the lawyers' concerns were made public, the Securities and Exchange Commission temporarily suspended trading of Bolar securities, citing a "lack of adequate current information." The suspension in trading began last Thursday and was to continue through this week through Saturday.
Bolar's version of Dyazide was the company's largest selling product and accounted for about half of its pre-tax income. The absence of sales of this product "will have a material adverse effect on earnings," Bolar said.

 

End of Document


Recalled Heart Drug Poses Risk Even After Patients Stop Using It
The New York Times
June 19, 1998, Friday, Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 1998 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 19; Column 1; National Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 556 words
Byline: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG 
 By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG 
Dateline: WASHINGTON, June 18
Body




Ten days after the Food and Drug Administration took the heart medication Posicor off the market, a new warning has been issued about the drug. A team of doctors in Oregon has reported that four patients who stopped taking Posicor went into shock after switching to other drugs, and that one died as a result.
Each of the four cases occurred before Posicor's withdrawal, and the drug's manufacturer, Roche Laboratories of Nutley, N.J., did not learn of them until last week. The company has since cautioned doctors to wait seven days before giving certain drugs, calcium channel blockers and beta-blockers, to patients who have discontinued Posicor.
"Patients need to be carefully tapered off this drug and their doctors need to know which are the safe alternatives," said Dr. Zane Horowitz, medical director of the Oregon Poison Control Center, which will report the four cases in the July 8 issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association.
Posicor, which treats high blood pressure and the chest pains known as angina, was pulled off pharmacy shelves in 38 countries on June 8 because it causes toxic and, in some cases, lethal interactions with 26 other drugs. It was being taken by 400,000 people around the world, 200,000 of them in the United States.
At the time it was withdrawn, the drug agency and Roche instructed patients not to stop taking Posicor, but to consult their doctors about alternative therapies. In an interview today, however, Dr. Horowitz said Posicor remained in the bloodstream for so long that it could cause toxic drug interactions even in patients who had stopped taking it.
The four patients Dr. Horowitz identified ranged in age from 55 to 79. In each case, their doctors had stopped prescribing Posicor because the drug was not working well. Each patient suffered shock, in which the blood pressure drops to dangerous levels, or other serious side effects within 12 hours of taking the new drugs. Three survived after intensive treatment in hospital emergency rooms and intensive care units; the 79-year-old, a woman, died.
Dr. Horowitz notified the Food and Drug Administration and had submitted an article to the Journal of the American Medical Association when Posicor was withdrawn from the market. Four days later, on June 12, Roche mailed a warning to doctors.
But the letter made no mention of a death, saying only that "a few patients have experienced drug interactions upon substituting alternative therapy for Posicor." Sidney M. Wolfe, director of Public Citizen's Health Research Group, an advocacy organization in Washington, called the omission "irresponsible."
However, Martin Hirsch, a spokesman for Hoffmann-La Roche Inc., the parent of Roche Laboratories, said the company had acted as "responsibly and rapidly as we could. Our sales force personally went on a massive campaign of speaking with physicians, and we set up phone lines so we would be prepared to deal very aggressively with getting the information out."
Hoffmann-La Roche is a United States subsidiary of Roche Holding Ltd. of Switzerland.
It is unclear if patients who have stopped taking Posicor since its withdrawal have suffered ill effects. A drug agency spokeswoman said Roche is not required to report any new cases for another five days.Mr. Hirsch said only that the company is "monitoring that very closely."
      
 Load-Date: June 19, 1998

 

End of Document


The recall of wonder drugs irks diet users
Deseret News (Salt Lake City)
October 24, 1997, Friday

 Copyright 1997 The Deseret News Publishing Co.
Section: WORLD/NATION;
Length: 628 words
Body




WASHINGTON (AP) ; Maria Checkley used to wake up longing for breakfast. At breakfast, she couldn't stop thinking about lunch. By noon, dinner was already planned.
Enter Redux, a diet drug that left her moody, dizzy and running to the bathroom with diarrhea ; but also helped her drop 25 pounds and ended her obsession to the point she often forgot to eat.
"My husband would come home at lunch time and ask me what I had for breakfast and I'd have to think. I'd look in the trash to see if there was any clue," said Checkley, a 30-year-old mother of three from Fort Walton Beach, Fla. "I'd look in the dishwasher for a dirty bowl and say, 'Gosh, I did eat.' "
So Checkley panicked when, 30 pounds shy of her ideal weight, manufacturers pulled Redux off the market along with fenfluramine, the "fen" in the popular diet cocktail known as "fen-phen," after the Food and Drug Administration and others raised health concerns.
She sought support from an Internet news group for dieters, posting a note asking, "Can I do it without Redux?"
She wasn't the only one. Dieters desperate to shed pounds, who marveled at the willpower they gained while on Redux and fenfluramine, are now scrambling for alternatives.
Some eyeball herbal remedies. Others contemplate alternative diet drug combinations including "phen-pro," which substitutes the anti-depressant Prozac for fenfluramine.
Many are furious over the negative attention showered on Redux and fenfluramine, even though researchers note they were pulled because of potentially life-threatening side effects.
Comparatively little fuss, these dieters argue, is being made over how the drugs finally brought success to thousands of dieters who failed to lose weight through more traditional methods.
"They're mad, plain mad, fighting mad," said Dr. Denise Bruner, president-elect of the American Society of Bariatric Physicians. "They want to call up the lawyers up and say, 'What happens when WE die of obesity?' "
Doctors should warn upset patients there are no quick fixes to keep pounds off permanently, she said.
"The whole point is, and people have got to understand this, there is no magic bullet in this deal."
All the frenzy over the search for alternatives worries Mary Ball, who has battled obesity all of her life and had been using fen-phen.
"The whole field of weight loss is open to shysterism," she said from the antique shop she runs in Leesburg, Va., "Folks are pitiful when trying to lose weight. They'll do anything."
For Ball, 54, the diet drugs were no cure-all, but they did help her shed pounds and ultimately keep her weight steady. That, in turn, helped reduce her blood pressure and cholesterol and encouraged her to start water aerobics.
Since going off the drugs cold turkey, Ball has begun exercising more and started a liquid protein-based diet to maintain her current weight.
"Nothing's a miracle drug. If it was a miracle drug I'd weigh 135 pounds now," Ball said.
The drugs may not have been a miracle, but they were the next best thing for Checkley, who said she never would have lost 25 pounds had it not been for Redux.
"I know I couldn't have, because I certainly have tried," said Checkley, who now weighs 165 pounds. "Those first 25 didn't come off because of me. They came off because the drugs gave me the ability to not scarf."
A few years ago Checkley skipped her high school reunion because she was too embarrassed by her weight. Until recently, she hated going for walks outside.
"I thought people would be driving by and making comments about how big my behind is, so I just didn't have the courage to do it," she said. Checkley now walks two to three miles several times a week, often with her husband and children.
She has not gained any weight since coming off Redux but she hasn't lost any either.
 Load-Date: April 3, 1998

 

End of Document


Diet drug maker expects little long-term effect from drug recall
September 29, 1997, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Domestic News
Length: 390 words
Byline: By JOHN HENDREN, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




American Home Products executives said Monday the recall of two of their diet drugs has prompted 21 class action lawsuits from dieters, but they also said the law is on the drug maker's side.
The Madison, N.J.-based consumer products giant did receive 11 "adverse drug reports" on the diet drugs Redux and Pondimin, out of 6 million users, before a Mayo Clinic report linked the drugs to heart problems in May. But the reports from patients were "very isolated and very scattered," company general counsel Louis L. Hoynes Jr. told analysts at a meeting.
The company said it should have little to fear from the class-action lawsuits and dozens more filed by individuals because the company had no duty to warn patients of side-effects of which it knew nothing.
"The law does not impose a duty to warn about an unknown and unintended risk," Hoynes said. "We will proceed knowing that we have always acted responsibly and in a timely manner."
The company recalled the drugs earlier this month at the request of the Food and Drug Administration, forcing thousands of dieters nationwide to alter their weight-loss regimens.
Analysts say the company's legal exposure is probably limited. Most of the claims come from those who took Pondimin, generically called fenfluramine, with the drug phentermine, a combination known as "fen-phen" that was neither approved by the FDA nor promoted by the company, the company said.
Pondimin had been on the market since 1973 in the United States. Redux, or dexfenfluramine, was used in Europe for 10 years, although it was only approved in the United States in mid-1996.
The company pointed out that the Mayo study did not show that the drugs caused heart damage, only that a statistical link may exist.
The company has no further plans to market an obesity drug, and sent one candidate back into early development after it failed to show satisfactory results, said Robert I. Levy, president of Wyeth-Ayerst, a division of American Home.
And Unlike Servier, which markets Redux in Europe, American Home Products does not foresee putting Redux and Pondimin back on the market - even if it is cleared of the suspected side-effects in future tests - said John R. Stafford, AHP's chairman, president and chief executive officer.
"Right now we have no plans and are not giving any consideration to remarketing them," he said.
 Load-Date: September 30, 1997

 

End of Document


Two weight-loss drugs recalled by manufacturers
The Straits Times (Singapore)
September 25, 1997

 Copyright 1997 The Straits Times Press Limited
Section: Home; Pg. 42
Length: 347 words
Body




THE manufacturers of the slimming drugs fenfluramine and dexfenfluramine have withdrawn them voluntarily from the market here.
The recall came into effect last Wednesday after the French drug company, Servier, informed the Health Ministry, doctors and pharmacists.
In a press statement, Servier said that the move came after the United States' Food and Drug Administration (FDA) asked the drugs' distributors there to remove them voluntarily from the American market last week.
Fenfluramine and dexfenfluramine have been available here by prescription for about 35 and 12 years respectively. The drugs act on the brain to reduce appetite.
The FDA's action was based on findings from doctors who had examined patients taking these drugs. The patients were examined with echocardiograms, a special procedure that can test the function of heart valves.
The doctors had found that about 30 per cent of the patients had abnormal readings, although they showed no symptoms.
Earlier, the FDA had issued warnings against the use of the drugs when combined with a third, phentermine.
The combination, popularly known as "fen-phen", has been used widely in the United States for the long-term management of obesity.
In July, doctors at the Mayo Clinic found that 24 of their women patients who had taken the combination for about one year, had a heart murmur.
Subsequent tests showed that one or more heart valves in each patient had been damaged. Five of the patients required surgery to replace or repair them.
The Straits Times understands that the combined use of the drugs is not authorised here.
In a letter to doctors and pharmacists here, 3M Pharmaceuticals, one of the distributors of phentermine, also stressed that it cannot be used in combination with other appetite suppressants.
The FDA had not asked for the withdrawal of phentermine in the US. It is also still available here.
Servier also said that since the the doctors' first reports in July, it has put in place a research programme to find out the long-term effects of its drugs.
 Load-Date: September 26, 1997

 

End of Document


3M recalls units of migraine drug taken by inhaler
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
September 10, 1991, Metro Edition

 Copyright 1991 Star Tribune
Section: News; Pg. 9A
Length: 261 words
Byline: Steve Gross; Staff Writer
Body




3M Co. has voluntarily recalled one lot of a prescription drug for treating migraine headaches after some customers reported nausea and vomiting.
 The recall involves nearly 24,000 units of the 3M product, a hand-held aerosol drug inhaler called Medihaler Ergotamine with Oral Adapter that was distributed in the United States and Australia, said Karyn Goad, a spokeswoman for 3M's pharmaceuticals division in Maplewood.
The affected products carry the lot number 901346, Goad said. A patient who has the product can contact the pharmacy where it was bought or the physician who prescribed it.
 The federal Food and Drug Administration (FDA) said the problem with the recalled inhalers is not life-threatening.
 The FDA rated the recall as Class II, which it defines as involving products that "may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences." With Class II recalls, "the probability of serious adverse health consequences is remote," according to the FDA.
 So far, 3M hasn't determined what caused the problem, Goad said. The company manufactures the inhaler in Northridge, Calif.
 Goad said the company learned about the problem from doctors who reported nausea and vomiting in their patients.
 Because all the incidents occurred within a six-week period, the company was able to trace the problem to a single lot of manufactured products, a total of 23,766 inhaler units, she said.
 In June, 3M asked independent wholesale distributors of the inhaler to disclose the recall to their customers, which are public and hospital pharmacies, Goad said.
 Load-Date: November 11, 1991

 

End of Document


Mad cow link in kidney drug recall 
THE AUSTRALIAN
February 11, 1998, Wednesday

 Copyright 1998 Nationwide News Pty Limited
Section: LOCAL; Pg. 2
Length: 523 words
Byline: JOHN KERIN
Body




A SERUM used to suppress human kidney transplant rejection has been recalled worldwide after its manufacture was yesterday linked to the deadly Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
 Pharmaceutical group Pharmacia Upjohn voluntarily recalled batches of the product in more than 20 countries, including Australia, after a US blood donor whose blood was used as part of a purification process in serum manufacture later developed the disease.
 CJD is a degenerative and fatal brain disease similar to so-called mad cow disease and causes dementia, ataxia and blindness. It has an incubation period of up to 40 years and has been transmitted by human tissue, but no link has been proven through blood or blood products.
MATP
More than 1000 vials of immuno-suppressant Atgam sterile solution have been distributed to Australian hospitals for treatment of transplant rejection. The company has distributed an estimated 62,000 vials worldwide.
 The pharmaceutical giant's Australian clinical director, Dennis Feeney, said last night the measure had been undertaken as an "extreme precaution", with any risk of kidney recipients contracting CJD "extremely low and bordering on theoretical". Dr Feeney said there had been no recorded case of transfer of CJD through blood or blood-plasma products. In this case, the product from the affected human donor had been used only as part of the purification process.
 "It's not possible to say how many people would have been treated, but we would estimate that it's probably less than 20 kidney transplant recipients in Australia," he said.
 Dr Feeney said 188 vials were stored in the company's warehouse in Rydalmere, western Sydney, with the rest of the unused product being recalled from hospital pharmacies -a process expected to be completed within a fortnight.
 Australian Kidney Foundation medical director John Knight said the risk to Australian kidney transplant recipients was "extremely low" and Upjohn Pharmacia had acted responsibly in recalling the product.
 "The transplant registry keeps contact with more than 4500 transplant recipients and there has been no recorded case of CJD," he said.
 Dr Knight advised any transplant recipients concerned about contamination to discuss the matter with their doctor or specialist.
 CJD has been at the centre of a prolonged legal wrangle between the Federal Government and recipients of an ill-fated Commonwealth-sponsored hormone treatment program that operated throughout the 1960s and 70s.
 Five people involved in the discontinued program died from the disease.
 Peter McCullagh, senior research fellow with the John Curtin School of Medical Research in Canberra, said that while there had not been any established cases of transmission of CJD via blood products, "the truth is, we simply don't know". Professor McCullagh said that with an incubation period of 15 to 40 years, "you wouldn't know of any risk for at least a decade". A spokesman for the Therapeutic Group Administration, which regulates therapeutic product use in Australia, said last night the company had made the decision to recall the product voluntarily in line with international recall procedures.
 Load-Date: March 1, 2002

 

End of Document


Atlanta Games; 2 Days to Go; City; Olympic Forum; Lewis recalls drug scandal at Seoul Games
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
July 17, 1996, Wednesday,
CONSTITUTION EDITION

 Copyright 1996 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: FOREIGN OLYMPICS; Pg. 29S
Length: 834 words
Byline: Mike Fish; STAFF WRITER
Series: This article was archived from the Metro edition of The Atlanta Constitution.
Body




Ben Johnson had just motored down the track faster than any man in history, even toyed with the runner-up, and yet Carl Lewis wasn't buying the outcome.
Eight years later, reflecting on the most significant drug scandal in Olympic history, Lewis says he knew something wasn't right that afternoon in Seoul, South Korea.
As he stole a glance of the thickly muscled Johnson on the medal podium that afternoon, Lewis detected a somber, almost downcast figure, hardly the look of a man who had just captured the crown jewel of his craft - the Olympic 100 meters. And a man, who had done so in a world- record 9.79 seconds.
Chalk one up to intuition.
Three days later, Johnson was hustled out of town, on a flight back to Canada, his urine sample having shown traces of a muscle-building steroid. The Olympic drug police had their big fish and, with little fanfare, silver medalist Lewis was upgraded to gold.
"To be honest, it didn't surprise me at all," said Lewis, long vocal in his suspicion of Johnson. "I remember getting in a car that day after the race and my manager (Joe Douglas) saying, 'Well, that's cool. He got this one, but you'll get the next one.' I said, 'Well, not for long.' I just felt like it wasn't over.
"I stood there on the podium, watched him not smile when he accepted a gold medal. How could you not smile? He didn't smile one time. . . . Everybody has a conscience, everybody has a soul. I think he finally got to where his conscience or soul didn't want it anymore.
"As people saw, he didn't seem to be that moved by the news. . . . The only thing he probably wishes he could have kept was more money."
Johnson, in a rare break from his public silence, disclosed to The Atlanta Journal-Constitution in 1993 that he supplemented his training with a number of muscle-building drugs for at least five years before the 1988 Seoul Olympics.
"I (took) them to beat the best people in the world," Johnson said. "To beat everybody, because that is the only way I could have won."
Fueled by Winstrol-V, a milky injectible steroid often prescribed for dogs and horses, Johnson blew away the Seoul competition. But in the tumultuous days to follow, he would be stripped of his gold medal.
Johnson has estimated his Seoul bust cost him $ 30 million in endorsements and potential appearance fees.
And though he was caught using drugs, though he has no Olympic gold medal or world record, Johnson still fancies himself as the world's fastest man.
"The only man who can run 9.79 is Ben Johnson. You run 9.79, that is beyond human speed, man."
Indeed, no other man has even ventured into the neighborhood. Two Olympics and almost a decade later, Leroy Burrell's world-record of 9.85 stands.
But it's the mark Johnson left on Olympic history that has stayed with Lewis these past years.
"Let me tell you, we knew," said Lewis, his voice rising. "What bothers me is they continue to allow Ben to say everyone else is on it. It shouldn't be printed. He knows it's a lie.
"Every athlete, every coach knew Ben was on it. It was something we'd known since '85, but it just took that long to catch him."
In Seoul, it was three days after the 100-meter final, at about 2 in the morning, when Lewis' camp got a tip from an NBC reporter that Johnson had flunked his drug test.
After his race, Johnson had gone to athletes' drug testing center where he needed 1 1/2 hours and several beers to produce a urine sample. Later his sample was divided into two parts labeled "a" and "b." A day after the race, not knowing whose urine they were examining, lab technicians discovered that the "a" sample contained steroids.
Prince Alexandre de Merode of Belgium, chairman of the IOC's medical commission, matched the sample to the list of athletes' numbers and became the first to learn of Johnson's guilt. The sprinter's "b" sample also tested positive later.
Soon, Lewis got official word that the gold medal was his. First, he had to turn in his silver medal. Third-place finisher Linford Christie would be upgraded to silver and American Calvin Smith to bronze.
In quiet, out-of-sight ceremonies, the athletes would be awarded their rightful medals. Lewis asked for a formal ceremony so Smith might have the opportunity to step on the medal stand, which he didn't have after the race, but nothing came of his request.
"I got the impression all along they didn't want to, that they wanted to keep it as quiet as possible," Lewis said. "So Calvin got his medal, I got my medal and Linford got his medal - all at different times, under the stadium in a room.
"The only comment I made was about the ribbon being very, very wrinkled. Like it had been in (Johnson's) pocket.
"This is horrible to say, but you know how with a rope you can have two people pulling in different directions. I had the feeling they were like this with Ben and the medal:
 
" 'Damn, give it to me.'
' "No.'
' "Give it to me.'
' "No."'
Finally, the medal taken from Johnson, Lewis had the ribbon ironed and stashed away in a bank vault with his seven other Olympic golds.
 Graphic



 
Photo: THE BIGGEST DRUG SCANDAL in Olympic history involved Ben Johnson
 of Canada at the 1988 Seoul Games. Carl Lewis (right) was awarded the
 gold after Johnson tested positive for steroids.
 Load-Date: July 17, 1996

 

End of Document


Drug Company Recalling Asthma Medicine
The Associated Press
January 5, 1994, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 389 words
Byline: By CHRISTOPHER CONNELL, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A Massachusetts generic drug company said Wednesday it is recalling millions of vials of an inhalation solution widely used by asthma patients and others with breathing problems.
Copley Pharmaceutical Inc. said some of its 20-milliliter Albuterol Sulfate Inhalation Solution was contaminated by microbial organisms.
It poses special risks of serious infection to people with compromised immune systems, including those with AIDS, cystic fibrosis, chronic obstructive lung disease and cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy or radiation, the company said.
Albuterol is a bronchodilator medication that Copley sells under its own name and other private brand labels.
It is a copy of an albuterol solution sold under the brand name Proventil by Schering-Plough Corp. Proventil is also sold as an inhaler and in other forms. None of the Schering products were contaminated or involved in the recall in any way.
The Food and Drug Administration listed it as a Class I recall, meaning the problem could cause serious health injury or even death. But FDA spokeswoman Susan Cruzan said the agency knew of no one actually harmed by the problem.
The recall involves all lots of the 20-milliliter vials of Albuterol Sulfate Inhalation Solution in 0.5 percent concentrate made by Copley and sold under its name and these private labels: Aligen, Astra, Geneva, Goldline, Harber, Major, Moore, H.L. Moore, Qualitest, Rugby and Schein.
It does not involve Copley's 0.083 percent albuterol product.
The solution is used in a device called a nebulizer to help clear patients' airwaves and let them breathe.
The Canton, Mass., company, said microbial organisms were found in certain packages of the Albuterol product made in the last three months. The company does not yet know what caused the problem.
Anthony A. Bonelli, the president, said, "We choose to err on the side of caution and rather than just limit the recall to those few lots where the organism was confirmed, we thought it would be in the public's best interest to recall everything that was put out on the market."
The company asked pharmacists to check records going back to Dec. 1, 1991, and notify patients to stop using the product at once and return any unused portions to their pharmacist. It said any of the solution with an expiration date of December 1995 or earlier should be returned.
 Load-Date: January 6, 1994

 

End of Document


DIET OF DRUGS: RECALL SPURS DESIRE FOR SUBSTITUTES
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
September 17, 1997, Wednesday, FIVE STAR LIFT EDITION

 Copyright 1997 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS, Pg. 04A
Length: 480 words
Byline: 1997,; Reuters News Service
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Monday's recall of two top diet drugs will leave a market wanting weight-loss products.
"People are very hungry for diet pills," said Michael Steelman, a doctor in Oklahoma City who is president of the Society of Bariatric Physicians, who specialize in obesity.
"There will be a lot of scrambling for substitutes and alternative approaches."
The Food and Drug Administration asked manufacturers to pull fenfluramine, sold as Pondimin, and dexfenfluramine, marketed as Redux in the United States and Adifax in Europe, off the shelves because of fears they could cause heart damage.
Fenfluramine was used with another drug, phentermine, to make the highly popular diet cocktail "fen-phen," taken by an estimated 1 million Americans.
 
Steelman said plenty of other drugs were available.
"The first of these is the use of appetite suppressant medications without fenfluramine and dexfenfluramine in the mix," he said. The other half of fen-phen, phentermine, was an effective and safe appetite suppressant, he said.
Diethylpropion, sold under the name Tenuate, was also a useful appetite suppressor, he said.
But he said drugs were only partly useful. "Those of us who are really dedicated in this field believe that the medications are only an adjunct anyway," he said.
All of the studies that showed drugs worked also included diet and exercise, he said.
Most of the weight that people lost during drug trials was due to the diet and exercise, with just five to seven pounds due to the drugs.
 
Steelman said drugs did add a little extra impetus for any dieter.
"There are a number of reasons that medications work, including some placebo effect," he said. "Taking a pill may remind a person that they're supposed to be eating less."
Doctors are looking to new drugs in the pipeline for Food and Drug Administration approval - including sibutramine (Meridia), made by Knoll Inc., a unit of BASF AG. But sibutramine works in a similar way to fenfluramine and dexfenfluramine and so might have a tougher time getting approval now.
Another drug is Xenical (orlistat), which helps stop the body from absorbing fat. But makers Roche Holding AG said they were delaying the launch of Xenical pending data on breast cancer cases seen in clinical trials.
Steelman said that left nonmedical drugs. "It does worry me that removal of these medications will put a lot of patients at the mercy of hucksters and unproved medications," he said.
Herbal preparations containing ephedrine - many marketed as "herbal fen-phen" - could be dangerous, he said.
Other substances are chitin, promoted as a fat-absorber, and chromium, which allegedly lowers sugar cravings.
Stephen Clement, director of Georgetown University's diabetes center, said drugs were really not the answer.
"There are plenty of other things that people can do to help themselves, like pushing themselves from the table and not eating so much," he said.
 Graphic



 
PHOTO, Photo From AP - A window advertisement at a weight-loss clinic promotes diet drugs Monday in Huntington Park, Calif. Two of the drugs have been banned.
 Load-Date: September 18, 1997

 

End of Document


German firm recalls AIDS test drug Removed worldwide after it failed to detect HIV in one case, company says
The Toronto Star
October 24, 1994, Monday, METRO EDITION

 Copyright 1994 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. B12
Length: 296 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: BERLIN
Body



BERLIN (AP) - A German company has recalled a drug used to test for AIDS after it failed to detect the virus in one case, the company said yesterday.
The drug Enzygnost is distributed by Behring, a subsidiary of Hoechst, one of Germany's largest health companies.
Behring spokesperson Wolfgang Faust said German pharmaceutical authorities have withdrawn the licence for the drug.
He said a worldwide recall action to 35 countries began Oct. 15 without any public announcement.
It was not known if Canada was on the list. A company spokesperson was not available for comment last night.
In Japan, the Yomiuri newspaper reported that the Japanese health and welfare ministry is asking for more information so it can decide whether to request further testing for people who tested negative for AIDS with Enzygnost.
Yomiuri said enough of the drug has been sold in Japan for 150,000 tests and 80 per cent of it has been used.
Faust said extensive retesting would not be necessary. He said only one problem case has turned up on the drug, which has been in use since 1991.
"There is no reason to panic," he said from Marburg, Behring's base.
Faust said the recall was based on a case in Munich in which a blood donor tested negative in June for HIV, the virus is believed to cause AIDS.
The donor was tested again in September and the result was positive.
The June blood sample was then tested with another drug and the result was positive, he said.
Faust said the diagnostic failure was partly explained by the gap between when a person is infected with HIV and when it can be detected in blood, which can be as long as 12 weeks.
But he said Behring has applied already to license an improved AIDS test drug and Enzygnost has become obsolete.
 Load-Date: May 12, 1999

 

End of Document


Chinese 'drugs' swimmer recalled; SWIMMING
DAILY MAIL (London)
January 10, 1998

 Copyright 1998 Associated Newspapers Ltd.
Section: Pg. 72
Length: 204 words
Byline: Richard Shears
Body




 YUAN YUAN, the champion breaststroke swimmer found with banned drugs in her luggage, was ordered to fly back to China along with her coach yesterday.
 The directive from Beijing came after Australian scientists identified the drugs as growth hormones.
Yuan Yuan, 21, was nowhere to be seen in Perth yesterday where the world swimming championships are being held. But China's decision to recall her was seen by many as an attempt to take the heat off other team members.
 'Her recall is just a red herring,' said Australian head coach Don Talbot.
 'Banning this one swimmer is some sort of proactive effort by China to show they are trying to take a stance.' The sport's governing body, FINA, has been urged to send a team to China to investigate the alleged abuse of muscle-building growth hormones.
 Professor Ken Fitch, a member of the IOC medical commission, said that allegations had been made before the Atlanta Olympics that the Chinese were using untraceable human growth hormones, but no evidence had been found.
 He added: 'Now we have the proof, I think this could have huge ramifications.' Immediate concern for FINA is the damage this scandal has done to the current championships.
 Load-Date: January 12, 1998

 

End of Document


COMMUNITY MUTUAL AIDING IN DRUG RECALL MANDATED BY THE FDA
PR Newswire
January 11, 1994, Tuesday - 11:06 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1994 PR Newswire Association, Inc.
Section: Financial News
Length: 406 words
Dateline: CINCINNATI, Jan. 11
Body




Community Mutual Insurance Company, the largest health insurer in the state, is asking its subscribers who recently received prescriptions of Generic Albuterol Sulfate Inhalant Solution 0.5% to contact their pharmacist and exchange the product immediately.  Copley Pharmaceuticals, the drug's manufacturer, has issued an immediate recall due to a contaminant discovered in a product.
Generic Albuterol Sulfate Inhalant 0.5% is most often used by patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease who could suffer severe adverse health effects from using the drug.
Late last week, the Food & Drug Administration (FDA) issued a Class 1 recall of Copley's Generic Albuterol Sulfate Inhalant 0.5%, mandating that all customers receive notification at once.
After the recall was announced, Community Mutual pharmacy claims were immediately reviewed statewide in an effort to identify those who received recent prescriptions of Generic Albuterol Sulfate Inhalant 0.5%.  The research revealed that nearly 200 subscribers possessed the inhalant. The company currently is contacting customers individually, warning them of the potential danger involved with continued usage and advising them on how to exchange the product.
In addition, Community Mutual's affiliates -- Group Health Associates in Cincinnati, Dayton-based Wright Health Associates, and the Trumbull Mahoning (Co.) Medical Group -- are disseminating the same message.
"Although the recall was instituted by Copley Pharmaceuticals and the FDA, we felt obligated to take this action," said Kim Massie, director of Community Mutual's pharmacy services department.  "The extra step ensures the health and safety of our customers and is well worth the time and effort."
According to Massie, Community Mutual is one of the few health insurers in the state that is capable of instantaneously reviewing data from claims and identifying customers with a particular ailment or prescription.
"For years, we have invested in advanced technological resources to prepare for events that call for swift reaction and targeted customer education.  Community Mutual is not just a claims processor, but a provider of current health care information to our customers," added Massie.
Based in Cincinnati, Community Mutual Insurance Company provides health care benefits to more than two million customers throughout Ohio and nationwide.
CONTACT: Erik Kirkhorn of Community Mutual Insurance Company, 513-872-8469

 

End of Document


DIET DRUG USERS HERE MOURN RECALL BY FDA
Capital Times (Madison, WI.)
September 18, 1997, Thursday,
ALL EDITIONS

 Copyright 1997 Madison Newspapers, Inc.
Section: Front,
Length: 958 words
Byline: By Scott Russell The Capital Times
Body




Madison real estate loan officer Jan Silvers is furious with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for its role in the recall of two diet drugs, leaving her to face the prospect of regaining the 80 pounds the drugs helped her lose.
The FDA urged the voluntary recall when data suggested that the drugs could cause heart valve problems. The pharmaceutical companies complied this week.
Silvers, a former size 24, said she believes if her obesity returns, she would face other daunting health risks: diabetes, high blood pressure and heart disease.
''Do you think at 5 feet tall and 218 pounds, I was not at risk for heart disease?'' she asks. ''My feeling is the FDA should make me aware of the risk and I should determine with my doctor about which way I go.
''We're going to get this back.''
She said she would like to challenge Donna Shalala, the U.S. secretary of health and social services who is visiting Madison today, to explain why cigarettes, which pose an absolute risk to health, are regulated with a warning label but beneficial drugs with a possible risk are recalled.
The drugs recalled were Pondimin, also known as fenfluramine, and Redux, also known as dexfenfluramine. They affect brain chemistry to suppress the appetite.
In dieters' terms, they stop the nonstop cravings to eat.
A third diet drug, phentermine, is still on the market. It helps people lose weight by increasing the body's metabolism, burning more calories. Phentermine is one-half of the popular ''fen-phen'' diet medication.
The drug recall has hit a nerve for people who have struggled to lose weight. Some see it as another societal slap in the face to those with weight problems. Yet local doctors who have prescribed the drug say that new studies on the drug's side effects justified the FDA's actions.
Without the drugs, it appears that many patients will regain the weight they lost, said Dr. Elizabeth Trowbridge of Physicians Plus Medical Group.
She has prescribed the diet drugs for roughly 40 to 50 patients. Concerned about possible side effects, she did not leave patients on the drugs long-term.
Roughly 95 percent of her patients regained the weight once they stopped taking the drug, she said.
''It's been one of the big disappointments,'' she said.
Despite the likely weight gain, Trowbridge still supports the drugs' recall.
''I think it is very clear with the information we have right now that the risk of heart disease outweighs the benefit of the medicine,'' she said.
One small study showed that nearly one-third of people taking the drugs developed heart valve problems, she said.
Trowbridge said she understands the concerns of some of her patients who have seen the medicine as a miracle drug. At the same time, she said it can be difficult to fully grasp the risks the drug poses.
''I think it's very difficult for people to comprehend what it means to have open heart surgery or congestive heart failure or other severe heart complications,'' Trowbridge said. ''That's where I have to as a doctor say: 'I won't let you take a medicine that will cause severe life threatening problems.' ''
It's not just those immediately affected by the drug recall that have strong feelings about it.
Wendy White of Spring Green is taking Phentermine to control her weight, and is unaffected by the ban on Redux and Pondimin. Still, she said she is angry about the FDA's push for their voluntary recall.
She said her diet drugs helped her lose 180 pounds in 14 months. She still exercised and tried to eat right, but the drugs ''have given me a fighting chance,'' White said.
And even if she thought her diet drugs posed a higher health risk, she would keep taking them.
''At least I would fit in my coffin,'' White said.
Both Silvers and White said the diet drugs didn't just prevent health problems, they significantly improved their quality of life.
Silver said she could not walk up to her Row 56 seats at Camp Randall Stadium without having to stop several times to catch her breath. The added weight on her knees kept her from doing the gardening she loved to do.
Those are no longer problems for her, she said.
Some professionals interviewed expressed surprise that the recall has not sparked a stronger reaction, however.
Jamie Statz, pharmacy supervisor for Dean Medical Center, said her department has received few calls. As she figures it, people were ready for the recall because news of the drugs' coronary side effects hit the media months ago.
''We saw a dramatic reduction in July. The volume we were dispensing dropped dramatically, 25 to 50 percent,'' she said.
Dr. John Schuetz, an internal medicine physician with Dean, said a number of patients made the decision on their own to drop the drug once the increased risks became apparent.
Schuetz, who has prescribed the now-recalled diet drugs to roughly 100 patients, has had the full spectrum of reaction, he said. Some patients are worried about the drugs' possible heart damage, others are worried about where to turn next to control their weight.
Schuetz said he did not feel comfortable in helping his patients assess the risk of heart disease, given the new studies.
''We can't say if it is one in 10,000 or one in three,'' he said. ''I think one in three is too high a risk.''
Some people, like Pat Skaife of McFarland, say other options need to be developed.
''It's important that research be done quickly and be done well,'' said Skaife, who uses phentermine to control her weight. ''Research on drugs for obesity has to be more of a priority.''
Trowbridge agreed.
''One of the reasons attention has not been turned to this, the medical profession and society as a whole has seen obesity as a problem of people with no will power,'' she said. ''We have not looked at it as a medical problem like hypertension.''
 Graphic



 
Jan Silvers in 1992 (left) and in 1997. Although she had lost weight before and gained it back, fen-phen allowed her to keep it off.
 Load-Date: September 19, 1997

 

End of Document


Drug recall will continue to plague company into 1997
January 27, 1997, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 525 words
Byline: By STEVE SAKSON, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Shares of Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Inc. fell sharply Monday after the pharmaceutical company said profits would continue to suffer from last year's apparent bacterial contamination of some of its drugs.
The company also announced substantial writeoffs following the abandonment of some unsuccessful biotechnology drug research.
Stock in the company, controlled by the French chemical and drug maker Rhone-Poulenc S.A., fell $ 4.37 , or 6 percent, to $ 71.62 on the New York Stock Exchange.
The drop came even as RPR announced a 21 percent increase in quarterly earnings to $ 165.4 million, or $ 1.21 per share, compared with $ 137.0 million, or $ 1.02 per share in the fourth quarter of 1995.
The numbers for 1995 were adjusted to account for businesses acquired during 1996 including the British drug maker Fisons PLC and biotech company Applied Immune Sciences Inc.
Quarterly sales for Collegeville, Pa.-based RPR were flat at $ 1.5 billion.
Last September, Centeon - a 50-50 joint venture of RPR and the German drug and chemical maker Hoechst AG - recalled 17,000 vials of human albumin products Albuminar and Plazma Plex.
The products, made from human blood albumin, are used by hospitals to restore blood volume to victims of burns, trauma and severe injuries.
Centeon sold $ 203 million worth in 1995 and was the market leader, but two people who got the products last year suffered blood poisoning that authorities linked to bacterial contamination.
Blood poisoning can be fatal but the two victims were treated successfully with antibiotics.
A Centeon plant in Kankakee, Ill. was temporarily shut down.
Sales losses, plus the costs of the recall, reduced RPR's 1996 profits by $ 60 million, after taxes, or 44 cents per share, the company said.
While the contamination was originally believed to have been caused when some vials of drugs cracked, analyst Edmund Debler of the New York firm of Mehta & Isaly said Monday the Food and Drug Administration found other parts of the plant weren't up to government standards.
The plant restarted production last Wednesday, but RPR president Timothy Rothwell said Monday that it won't be shipping products until April.
"It's clear it will be 1998 before we can get back to where we were prior to this situation," he said.
Also in the fourth quarter, RPR wrote off $ 102.6 million in assets of Applied Immune Sciences related to unsuccessful research into whether human cells can be genetically manipulated in a test tube and reinjected to cure diseases.
RPR also reported disappointing 1996 sales of $ 28 million of Rilutek, its year-old drug for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, an always-fatal neurological disorder known as Lou Gehrig's disease.
Rilutek has failed to live up to expectations that it would extend the lives of victims in later stages of the disease by several months.
RPR reported strong sales gains of its anti-blood clotting drug Lovenox and Taxotere, a chemotherapy treatment for breast cancer.
For the full year, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer earned $ 428.7 million, or $ 3.16 per share, on sales of $ 5.42 billion. In 1995, the company had a profit of $ 341.6 million, or $ 2.53 per share, on sales of $ 5.32 billion.
 Load-Date: January 27, 1997

 

End of Document


Glaxo Wellcome faces hit of 270m pounds from drug recall
The Scotsman
December 2, 1997, Tuesday

 Copyright 1997 The Scotsman Publications Ltd.
Section: Pg. 24
Length: 380 words
Byline: Andrew Turpin
Body




 GLAXO Wellcome, the world's biggest prescription drug group, has withdrawn a major diabetes drug with potentially £ 270 million annual sales after reports of side effects including six deaths in the United States and Japan.
 The drug, troglitazone, is to treat Type 2 diabetes and is sold in the UK under the name Romozint. Patients using it are being told to consult their doctors.
Glaxo only launched the drug in the UK on 1 October and said in the two months it had been available, it had been prescribed to 5,000 patients.
 A Glaxo spokesman said the decision to pull the drug had been made after 147 reports of liver problems among 670,000 users in the US and Japan, including six deaths, since its launch there in the spring of this year. Glaxo has the licence from Japanese makers Sankyo Pharma to market the drug in the UK and Europe, plus other countries including Israel and South Africa.
 So far no sales have been made in Europe, but analysts had pencilled in total potential sales of the drug by Glaxo of £ 90 million next year, £ 180 million in 1999 and £ 270 million by 2000. Shares in Glaxo, after dipping initially, recovered to end up 40p at 1340p.
 In the US, the licence to market troglitazone is held by Warner-Lambert, whose shares were marked down sharply after the Glaxo statement. So far, Warner-Lambert, which sells the drug under the name Rezulin, has made no announcement about withdrawing it from sale.
 However, Warner did say that stricter patient monitoring by doctors for any signs of liver problems would be required.
 The US Food and Drug Administration issued similar warnings and said information about possible liver damage should be more prominently displayed on drug labels.
 In Japan, Sankyo, which first developed the drug and sells it under the name Noscal, was ordered by the Ministry of Health and Welfare to warn patients.
 The Glaxo Wellcome spokesman said: "This is a disappointment, but there were clearly serious side effects and we had to take those seriously."
 Glaxo said it was withdrawing applications currently with the European Commission to market troglitazone in other EC countries under the mutual recognition system, where approval by one country's regulatory authorities allows distribution in other states.  GLAXO WELLCOME PLC; 
 Load-Date: December 2, 1997

 

End of Document


Mural recalls fond memories of drug store
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
November 19, 1994, Saturday,
FLORIDA EDITION

 Copyright 1994 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: HEARTLAND,
Length: 684 words
Byline: TERESA STEIN
Body




Tuesday night was a blustery, rainy night. The outdoor dedication of the Lake Placid Drug Store mural was switched by the Lake Placid Mural Society to the Caladium Cottage restaurant.
It was a good change. The old-timers who came to exchange stories of how it used to be in the early days of the drug store did not have to get wet.
The place was packed. And it wasn't just the dinner menu of favorite drug store fountain meals that drew the large crowd. The people came because the founders of the drug store, Lee and Lillian Crews, and their extended families, the Stidhams and the Duntys, are favorites of the Heartland.
It all started in the early 1920s when the young Avon Park pharmacist Lee Crews came to Lake Placid, hired by A.M. McAulay to operate a pharmacy for him in his store located in the Tribble Building on Old State Road 8, now known as Main Street.
Crews bought the business from McAulay in 1925 and ever since the Lake Placid Drug Store has been a beacon of service and friendliness to residents and visitors alike. It was also a place to get wonderful food.    A gradual beginning  The pharmacy didn't start out with a soda fountain, says co-owner Dee Dee Stidham, daughter of the Crews.
"But Dad worked so late and hard in the store that he didn't have time to eat proper meals. So Mom started baking hams and making potato salad, or making tuna salad to bring in for him for lunch.
"Gradually, others began to share it and a soda fountain just evolved."
"I remember sitting on chairs like this one," said Mayor Dal Hall at the dedication, as he held up a chipped, green-painted, three-legged chair from the original store.
"They were just one step up and just about as comfortable as the old-fashioned milking stool," said co-owner Charlie Stidham.
But they didn't stop people from making the drug store their official restaurant stop.
"One of my strongest memories," said Crews' daughter, Virginia Dunty, "was of spending holidays and spare time "mayonnaising the bread and wrapping the sandwiches' for the fountain.
"Then Mom, who really wanted to be a pharmacist, but decided against it because it took so long, gradually gave up her school teaching position to work with Dad full time in the store. And she started cooking full meals."    If it's Tuesday it must be . . .  "Monday was meat loaf day," said Stidham. "Tuesday was turkey and dressing; Wednesday was stuffed peppers; Thursday was liver and onions, and Friday, we served chicken and dumplings and ham, lima beans and corn bread. And Mom made 12 to 15 pies from scratch every day. Coconut cream was the most popular."
It was never known if Lake Placid was an official stop on the Greyhound bus route. But it was official as far as the drivers were concerned.
"They'd stop every time," said Dunty. "They said they liked the friendliness of the drugstore staff and the townspeople."
Bob Dunty, retired lawyer who also served as town and county legal counsel during his career, was one of those friendly drugstore workers.
He was the soda jerk at the original store on Main Street.
"That's where I found out about Pearl Harbor," he said Tuesday night. "I was out on the sidewalk in front of the store that Sunday afternoon, Dec. 7, 1941, talking to some of the kids who had parked. Someone had his radio on, and the program was interrupted with a news bulletin of the Japanese attack."
After a military stint during World War II, Dunty returned to become a lawyer and eventually opened his office next to Lake Placid Drug Store, which had moved to the Interlake Boulevard location. He also married Virginia Lee Crews, the eldest of the two Crews girls.
Relating some of Lillian Crews humor at the dedication, Dunty spoke to a friend who once asked Lillian Crews if she had ever taught Bob Dunty.
"Yes," she answered. "Well, did you ever paddle him?" the lady asked.
"Yes," said Crews. "But if I had known he was going to marry my daughter, I'd have beat him half to death."
There were many of Lillian Crews' former students in the audience Tuesday night. And many of the former employees of the store.  Next Week: From cigar boxes to computers.
 Notes



COLUMN; HEARTLAND HERITAGE
 Graphic



 
SIGNATURE
 Load-Date: November 21, 1994

 

End of Document


Drugs cloud Gazza recall 
The Daily Telegraph (Sydney, Australia)
January 14, 1999, Thursday

 Copyright 1999 Nationwide News Pty Limited
Section: SPORT; Pg. 49
Length: 371 words
Body




LONDON: Middlesbrough yesterday told controversial midfielder Paul Gascoigne to concentrate on life in the English Premier League and disregard the latest controversy over his anti-depressant drugs.
 Gascoigne, 31, is hoping to revive his England career for next month's friendly with world champions France.
 Reports in the English media yesterday suggested that Gascoigne's admission he was taking anti-depressants had scared England coach Glenn Hoddle off giving the midfielder a recall.
MATP
But Middlesbrough's assistant manager Viv Anderson told Gascoigne to continue to perform well for his club and then an international call would surely follow.
 "All Gazza can do is go out and play football. He showed his ability against Aston Villa and we want him to reproduce that form at a consistent level," said Anderson.
 "As far as we are concerned it is not about England at the moment.
It is about Paul Gascoigne and Middlesbrough.
 "If Gazza is playing consistently well then other things will follow."  Anderson said Gascoigne has been taking one drug a day, as recommended by medical staff.
 Hoddle stunned the football world by dropping Gascoigne from his squad for last year's World Cup finals and later revealed the midfielder's furious reaction in his World Cup diary.
The two are said not to have spoken since.
 * MANCHESTER United director Sir Bobby Charlton insisted yesterday the club would do everything in its power to ensure that influential captain Roy Keane signs a new contract at Old Trafford.
 Keane, whose current deal expires at the end of next season, is reported to want a wage increase from $46,000 to $80,000 a week, which would break the club's wage structure.
 "Roy is a great player. I don't think there'll be any problem at the end of the day. We'll try to sort something out with him," said Sir Bobby.
 "We wouldn't want to lose him. We don't want to lose any good players as there's not so many of them around."  Although Keane's solicitor was at pains to stress the midfielder was not holding the club to ransom, the player has admitted it "could be interesting" if terms could not be agreed.
 United said they do not want negotiations with the Irishman to disrupt their premiership and European campaigns.
 Load-Date: March 4, 2002

 

End of Document


PM-Counterfeit-Drugs, Bgt ; Budget; Phoney packaging, tampering prompts drug recall, police probe
The Canadian Press (CP)
May 17, 1996 Friday

 Copyright 1996 Press News Limited, All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL GENERAL NEWS
Length: 469 words
Byline: By Richard van Abbe
Dateline: TORONTO
Body



TORONTO (CP) - A Canadian pharmaceutical company has recalled two types of contraceptives and a drug to ease menstrual pain after a bogus version of one drug and counterfeit packages containing two others were distributed to drug stores.
The drugs are Brevicon and Synphasic, both oral contraceptives, and Synarel, a prescription nasal spray designed to control endometriosis, a condition that causes painful menstrual periods. All three products also bear the label Syntex.
Spokesmen for Searle Canada, a division of Monsanto Canada Inc., said Thursday there was little risk to the public. The oral contraceptives are repackaged samples.
However, Anne Tomalin, a spokesperson for the Oakville, Ont., company, said one patient had complained that she suffered headaches and nausea after taking Synarel.
She also warned that women taking Synarel could experience unexpected menstrual bleeding because the phoney drug lacks the active ingredient of the real medicine.
The RCMP commercial crimes division and the federal Health Protection Branch are investigating. Spokesmen for the two agencies were not available for comment.
Searle ordered a limited recall of Brevicon and Synphasic, the oral contraceptives, after discovering that free samples of the tablets sent to physicians had been repackaged in containers doctored to make them look like regular commercial products, then sold to unwary pharmacies.
Investigation also showed that counterfeit bottles labelled Synarel contained a diluted concentration of flunisolide, a corticosteroid used as a nasal mist to control hay fever.
"Someone found some bottles that looked like the real bottles, put some material in those bottles and placed a label around the bottles that made the product look as though it were Synarel,'' Tomalin said in a telephone interview late Thursday night.
She declined to guess at the identity of possible suspects. "We're upset,'' she said, "but at this point we really can't begin to speculate in terms of how organized the operation might be.''
She added: "In the case of the oral contraceptives, we are confident that the tablets are fine and that there's no problem with them. In the case of Synarel there is a problem and we do need to get all the material back off the market.''
She noted that with Synarel, someone taking the phoney drug might notice an odd odor, but "we wouldn't really expect that there would be any reaction to the very tiny dose of the second ingredient.''
Besides Synarel, the products subject to partial recall are:
- Brevicon lot 28044A, EXP AU 98 and lot 36658B, EXP SE 1998.
- Synphasic lot 28044A, EXP AU 98 and lot 36658B, EXP SE 1998.
People who have concerns can call their doctor, drug store or Searle at 1-800-387-7942.
The company said pharmacies that return the recalled lots would receive replacement products.
 Load-Date: October 11, 2002

 

End of Document


HIV-test drug found unreliable, product recalled
The Daily Yomiuri
October 23, 1994, Sunday

 Copyright 1994 The Daily Yomiuri
 
Length: 541 words
Byline: Yomiuri Shimbun
Dateline: TOKYO
Body




The Japanese outlet of the German-based drug-maker Hoechst Ltd. has started to recall a drug used for HIV-testing following reports that the product failed to detect the virus in an HIV-positive subject, it was learned Saturday.
The decision to recall the product was made in Germany where the drug is manufactured after an HIV-positive subject tested negative with the drug called Enzygnost. The drug was developed by a subsidiary of Hoechst Ltd.
Hoechst Japan Ltd. immediately notified 50 medical facilities and hospitals nationwide that are using the product of the recall decision.
But nearly 80 percent of Enzygnost sold to those medical facilities since December last year--or enough to test 150,000 people--has already been used.
With a growing incidence of AIDS cases in Japan, the number of people testing for HIV--the virus that causes the fatal disease--has increased. Over the past couple of years, over 100,000 people have tested for the virus at local health departments annually.
The Health and Welfare Ministry has asked the firm to submit detailed data on the drug.
In HIV tests, blood samples are first tested for HIV antibodies. If the preliminary screening is positive, a second test will be administered. Enzygnost is used in the preliminary screening.
According to Hoechst Japan, a person tested negative for HIV in a test administered Enzygnost after testing positive in a test administered with a different drug. The same person then tested positive for HIV when he was tested again with Enzygnost three months later.
Because Enzygnost is widely used for HIV-tests in Germany, Germany's serum and vaccine research institute temporarily withdrew approval for the drug, and ordered the company to recall all its products immediately.
Hoechst Ltd. told its overseas outlets located in 35 countries to recall all Enzygnost products Tuesday. Hoechst Japan began recalling the product Thursday after reporting the recall order to the Health and Welfare Ministry.
There are two different methods to screen for HIV; the enzyme-antibody method, and the gelatin agglutination method. Lately, the enzyme-antibody method is becoming more common.
In Japan, there are several different drugs used for the enzyme-antibody method. Enzygnost was becoming popular among major test companies as it was believed to be more sensitive than other drugs. Enzygnost now accounts for 40 percent of drugs used for the enzyme-antibody method in Japan.
According to the Health and Welfare Ministry's AIDS Surveillance Committee, the number of those infected with AIDS or HIV in Japan stands at 3,481 as of the end of August. The number is continuing to rise.
The ministry recently began providing free HIV tests to prevent further spread of the disease. The number of those getting tested increased tenfold in two years from 11,000 in 1991 to over 110,000 in 1993.
"We asked the company to submit more detailed data," said Hiroshi Inaba, head of the ministry's AIDS, tuberculosis and infectious disease section.
"Right now, we are trying to determine how accurate the tests were. Depending on what we find out, we may have to ask those who tested negative with this drug to get tested again. In any case, we have to take some kind of action to avoid confusion," he said.
 Load-Date: October 23, 1994

 

End of Document


Banned drug 'mule' recalled by Beijing
Hobart Mercury (Australia)
January 10, 1998, Saturday

 Copyright 1998 Nationwide News Pty Limited
Length: 447 words
Byline: WAYNE SMITH
Body




Coach 'also must
take responsibility'
YUAN YUAN, the Chinese swimmer turned into an unwitting drug courier
"mule" by her coach, yesterday was dramatically ordered out of the
world swimming championships in Perth.
Tests conducted yesterday by the Australian Government Analytical
Laboratory on 13 vials found in Yuan's luggage by Sydney Customs
officers on Thursday confirmed they contained a prohibited growth
hormone.
Chinese Olympic authorities, after apparently being made aware of the
test results by the Australian Government announced her ban in
Beijing.
However, no sanction has yet been imposed on the coach, who admitted
to Customs officials that he had placed a thermos flask filled with
vials of human growth hormone in her luggage.
"We have initially decided to ask her not to attend the
competition," a spokesman for the Chinese Olympic Committee said.
"The coach also must take responsibility but we have not yet decided
what to do.'
FINA secretary Gunnar Werner last night announced that Yuan Yuan and
her coach, Zhou Zhewen, would both face bans of at least four years
when their case was considered by the FINA doping commission, which
was set to meet on the matter late last night.
Werner said FINA considered that both the swimmer and coach had
breached rule DC9a, regarding the trafficking of banned substances.
However he said FINA had "found no reasons" to take action against
the Chinese team at large.
As FINA considered the matter, rumours swept the Challenge Stadium
arena that the Chinese team planned to withdraw en masse from the
world championships. However this was denied by championship
organisers.
Cornel Marculescu, director of swimming's world governing body FINA,
admitted yesterday that his organisation had received no notification
either of the drug test results or of the Chinese ban on Yuan.
He added: "We need to have the results of the analysis."
He said FINA would need to know the full extent of the penalty imposed
on Yuan before deciding whether any further action was required.
He added: "The Yuan incident had cast a giant shadow over the 8th
world championships. We cannot have this balloon going, going, going
up . . .'
Outspoken China critic Forbes Carlile said yesterday that if the
consignment was large enough to dope a reasonable proportion of the
Chinese team, the entire contingent should be expelled from the
championships.
The coach of the Chinese swimmer who brought banned growth hormones to
Australia had been asked by someone in China to deliver them to
someone else in Australia, Chinese delegation chef de mission Shi
Tianshu said last night.
"What these two members have done was a violation of the discipline
of our delegation. It was definitely wrong," Shi said.
 Load-Date: March 8, 2002

 

End of Document


DRUGS FIRM RECALLS CAPSULES AFTER 'SLEEPY' MIX UP
Press Association
May 27, 1997, Tuesday

 Copyright 1997 The Press Association Limited
Section: HOME NEWS
Length: 245 words
Byline: Roger Williams, PA News
Body




Packs of a popular cold treatment are being recalled today - because some of them contain dosage instructions which leave you feeling "sleepy all day".  SmithKline Beecham, the UK's second biggest drugs company, is recalling "hundreds" of packets of Night Nurse Capsules after two customers read the instructions inside and realised they were for Day Nurse Capsules.
"The Night Nurse instructions say you should take two tablets at night before you sleep, and they are intended to help someone with a cold have a good night's sleep," a spokeswoman told PA News.  "The Day Nurse insert says you should take two tablets four times a day. If you took that many Night Nurse tablets there would not be a true overdose situation, but it would make you feel sleepy all day." It was thought unlikely that people would take the product four times a day when they had clearly bought it for night-time use, she said. The correct dosage was clearly stated on the pack itself.  Customers were asked to check packs with the batch number BN466E on the right hand flap of the pack. If they contained a Day Nurse Capsules leaflet, they should return the pack to a pharmacist.  The spokeswoman said the batch included 17,000 packs, but it was only "a very small proportion" had the wrong inserts, "probably in the hundreds".  SmithKline Beecham was investigating how the mistake had occurred, and was working closely with the Medicines Control Agency, the spokeswoman said.
 Load-Date: May 27, 1997

 

End of Document


Day-leave drug deals, recalls former inmate
The Evening Post (Wellington)
April 13, 1998, Monday

 Copyright 1998 Wellington Newspapers Limited
Section: NEWS; NATIONAL;
Length: 377 words
Byline: STEWART Bruce
Body




Inmates from a Wellington prison, including some involved in the Mr Asia drug ring, flew to Auckland to deal drugs while on a day's church leave, a former prisoner says.
Christchurch newspaper the Press traced former inmate Bruce Stewart, of Island Bay, Wellington.
Mr Stewart said he and four other prisoners - including the notorious transtasman drug dealer known as Mr Asia - flew to Auckland to deal drugs while supposedly on Sunday church leave from Wi Tako Prison in Wellington 25 years ago.
They donned wigs and borrowed clothes and day-tripped to deal cannabis and LSD. They were back in time for lockup on Sunday night.
"What happened then could still be happening. It could easily happen at Addington. It's an old building," he said in reference to recent reports of prisoners escaping and returning at will from Addington Prison in Christchurch.
Mr Stewart got out of jail when he was 37 and turned his back on crime and drugs. Now 62, he is the founder of a successful marae in Island Bay.
He remembered the excitement of sneaking off to Auckland, getting away from life on the inside.
But he was frightened of the guns and killing in the drug-dealing world.
Prisoners returned because they did not want to go on the run. "In the end they would catch you. You would just spend your time looking over your shoulder if you did a runner."
So, Mr Stewart said, the inmates just took small escapes, and brought back drugs for "mind escapes".
Weekends of sex, drugs and rock and roll were the norm for at least one inmate of Wi Tako, a Christchurch woman said.
The woman, whom The Post has agreed not to name, said that about 22 years ago she used to pick up her boyfriend after his church leave to enjoy a day of sex and drugs in Wellington city.
"After a Sunday on the outside, he (the boyfriend) would get enough drugs to take back for himself and even to satisfy a few of his mates in prison."
She said no one kept track of inmates after attending church and she could pick her friend up quite easily and return him to the prison before 5pm.
She said surveillance in the prison's visiting room was also slack. She once witnessed an inmate sexually molesting his young daughter while other visitors "turned a blind eye". - NZPA
Supplied by New Zealand Press Association
 Load-Date: April 16, 1998

 

End of Document


STUDY THAT USED NOW-RECALLED DIET DRUG IS CALLED RISKY, RACIST / RESEARCHERS LOOKED AT THE ROOTS OF VIOLENCE. THEY SAID THE MINORITY CHILDREN HAD BEEN IN NO DANGER.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
APRIL 18, 1998 Saturday D EDITION

 Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved
 
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. A06
Length: 562 words
Byline: Verena Dobnik, ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




A government-funded study in which poor black and Hispanic boys were given a now-recalled diet drug to test for violent tendencies is being criticized as risky and racist. The federal government has launched an investigation.
Scientists at an institute affiliated with Columbia University were testing the brain chemistry of 34 boys using fenfluramine, which has since been taken off the market because of suspected links to heart-valve damage in adults. It is the "fen" in the diet drug combination fen-phen.
Critics say the experiments, conducted in 1994 and 1995, offered no medical benefits and put the children at risk.
"These racist and morally offensive studies put minority children at risk of harm in order to prove they are generally predisposed to be violent in the future," said Vera Hassner Sharav, director of Citizens for Responsible Care in Psychiatry and Research.
The researchers defended their efforts as a legitimate attempt to understand the roots of violence.
The children were given a single fenfluramine pill and were kept in a hospital bed for at least five hours with a catheter in their arm while blood samples were taken. They were without food for at least 17 hours.
The boys all had older brothers who were juvenile delinquents, and the scientists wanted to know whether levels of serotonin in the brain could signal aggression. Fenfluramine induces the brain to release serotonin.
The boys' parents signed consent forms for the research at the New York State Psychiatric Institute.
Similar research, conducted by Queens College and Mount Sinai School of Medicine, is also under fire. That project used fenfluramine on 66 boys of various ethnicities who had been treated for attention-deficit disorder.
The institute, which reached no firm conclusions in a study published in September, issued a statement Thursday saying its research tried to identify factors that could trigger aggression "in a population at risk for the development of antisocial behavior."
Fenfluramine and a chemically similar diet drug, Redux, were pulled from the market because they were linked to potentially deadly heart-valve damage. Earlier this month, however, a large study found no sign that brief use of Redux causes dangerous heart-valve problems.
Queens College, which is part of the City University of New York, said its study "posed no danger to children. . . . No child was harmed in any way." Mount Sinai said the research complied with federal regulations. Its subjects were divided evenly among blacks, Hispanics and whites.
Two nonprofit legal groups filed complaints about both experiments with the federal Office of Protection from Research Risks in Rockville, Md., which has begun investigating.
The institute's experiment, which was partially federally funded, was conducted in 1994 and 1995 on boys ages 6 to 10. They were chosen through Family Court records, and came from mostly low-income, troubled families in Manhattan and the Bronx.
"The question is, what were the parents told, and what did they understand when they signed the consent form?" Sharav said. "These were just kids with no history of misbehavior, whose brothers were in trouble."
The research on attention-deficit disorder was conducted at Mount Sinai's medical school over three years, ending in 1996. Those children, ages 7 to 11, were given fenfluramine after treatment for the disorder.
 Load-Date: October 24, 2002

 

End of Document


Nation in Brief Drug firm recalls inhalation solution
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
January 6, 1994, Thursday

 Copyright 1994 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: NATIONAL NEWS; Section C; Page 2
Length: 693 words
Body




A Massachusetts generic drug company said Wednesday it is recalling millions of vials of an inhalation solution widely used by asthma patients and others with breathing problems. Copley Pharmaceutical Inc. said some of its 20-milliliter Albuterol Sulfate Inhalation Solution was contaminated by microbial organisms. It poses special risks of serious infection to people with compromised immune systems, including those with AIDS, cystic fibrosis, chronic obstructive lung disease and cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy or radiation, the company said.
The Food and Drug Administration listed it as a Class I recall, meaning the problem could cause serious health injury or even death. But FDA spokeswoman Susan Cruzan said the agency knew of no one harmed by the problem. The recall involves all lots of the 20-milliliter vials of Albuterol Sulfate Inhalation Solution in 0.5 percent concentrate made by Copley and sold under its name and these private labels: Aligen, Astra, Geneva, Goldline, Harber, Major, Moore, H.L. Moore, Qualitest, Rugby and Schein.
HEALTH
NUCLEAR CONTAMINATION? The safety engineering manager at San Onofre nuclear power plant testified in San Diego that the plant's supposedly safe areas and a worker's home were contaminated by radiation from defective fuel rods in the mid-1980s. Chong Chiu was called as a hostile witness by lawyers for Rung Tang, who's suing San Onofre's owner, Southern California Edison. Tang, 44, contends she contracted a rare form of cancer from leaking radiation at the plant from 1985 to 1986. At the time, she worked at San Onofre as an inspector for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. Chiu headed a task force created in 1986 to examine the problem of fuel fleas at San Onofre. Fuel fleas are tiny particles of radioactive material that escape from containment areas. San Onofre eventually was fined $ 100,000 by the NRC for safety violations involving the fuel fleas and slowness reporting the problem.
-HALE AND HEARTY: Despite being shot and having two potentially serious medical conditions, Ronald Reagan was in good health while he served as president, according to medical records released Wednesday. The records are summarized in the Journal of the American College of Surgeons by Dr. Oliver H. Beahrs of the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minn. Reagan, who turns 83 on Feb. 6, was 69 when he took office.
MILITARY
MARINES DISCHARGED FOR PORN INVOLVEMENT: Two Marines were discharged and three face possible discharge for their involvement in a pornography ring, officials at Camp Pendleton in California said. The internal investigation started last year and identified 10 Marines - nine men and a woman - as having posed in sexually explicit photographs or videos. The Marine Corps has refused to identify those involved.
AEROSPACE
FUEL LINE LIKELY CAUSED LOSS OF MARS CRAFT: A broken fuel line most likely caused the loss of the $ 1 billion Mars Observer last August, experts said, conceding they have no conclusive explanation for one of NASA's biggest disappointments. "We found no smoking gun," said Timothy Coffey. "There was no telemetry from the spacecraft, no hard evidence to investigate. Therefore, it was impossible to provide conclusive evidence." Coffey headed an independent board investigating the sudden disappearance of the spacecraft Aug. 21, after an 11-month trip and only three days before it was to orbit Mars.
CRIME
STILL NO MENENDEZ VERDICT: The daily public drama has ended for followers of the Erik and Lyle Menendez murder trial in Los Angeles. The action now is in private, where jurors are preparing for the final performance. The Erik and Lyle Menendez trial drew new viewers to the fledgling Court TV cable channel during the five-month trial. Spectators who crowded the suburban Van Nuys courthouse occasionally stop by. But the once busy hallways are eerily empty. Three weeks into deliberations, reporters keep a vigil, jumping every time a phone rings and racing to the courtroom whenever a jury question is reported. Lyle's jury completed its 15th day of deliberations Wednesday, and Erik's jury ended its 13th day.
From our news services
 Load-Date: January 7, 1994

 

End of Document


Counterfeit drug probed: Prescriptions recalled
Hamilton Spectator (Ontario, Canada)
May 23, 1996 Thursday Final Edition

 Copyright 1996 Metroland Media Group Ltd
Section: BURLINGTON; Pg. T3; News
Length: 335 words
Byline: Ross Longbottom
Body




RCMP are investigating an apparently complex counterfeit operation in which a simple $20 hay fever spray was substituted and sold as an expensive solution to treat endometriosis. Prescriptions for the medication cost patients close to $350.
Searle Canada Limited of Oakville has asked users of the medication Synarel to return the drug to pharmacies. It's thought only a limited number of false prescriptions have been given out, said Searle spokesperson Anne Tomalin, but the company is taking no chances and asks that the medication be returned.
THE SPECTATOR
Police are not releasing any details of their investigation.
Synarel is sold by Searle for about $280 to wholesalers, who then sell to drug stores. The people who plotted the counterfeit scheme stood to make a lot of money by substituting the nasal mist corticosteroid for the expensive Synarel medication nafarelin acetate.
Ms Tomalin said someone got bottles that are similar to those used for Synarel, made up counterfeit labels and packages, and sold them with the nasal spray solution to pharmacies.
Medication for the treatment of endometriosis -- a condition generally causing symptoms such as inflammation of the pelvis and severe pain during periods and intercourse, and causing possible infertility -- is sometimes given in the form of nasal spray, said Ms Tomalin, because it bypasses the digestive system, which can break down the medication.
About 1,000 to 1,500 people in Canada use Synarel.
The counterfeit drug came to the company's attention May 13 when a Toronto pharmacist called Searle to say the medication wasn't working.
Searle examined the drug and found it to be a solution similar to one used to treat nasal drip from hay fever, and that the package and bottle label were counterfeit.
Police are also investigating the sale of two oral contraceptives that were meant for free distribution by doctors, but were sold to pharmacies. There is nothing wrong with those products, said Ms Tomalin. Police believe the two schemes are linked.
 Graphic



 
Photo: John Rennison, The Spectator; Anne Tomalin holds counterfeit product, real product, right.
 Load-Date: October 13, 2002

 

End of Document


Duramed recalls drug products
United Press International
February 11, 1991, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1991 U.P.I.
Section: Financial
Length: 172 words
Dateline: CINCINNATI
Body




Duramed Pharmaceuticals, Inc. said Monday it is recalling all remaining lots of an estrogen drug product.
 ''Duramed has instituted the voluntary recall because of the potential of some of the tablets to fail a required USP dissolution test, which requirements became effective Jan. 1, 1990,'' said company officials.
''None of the marketed lots of Duramed's conjugated estrogens at this time evidence a dissolution problem and Duramed has undertaken this voluntary action only as a precaution,'' added company officials.
 Duramed said it has advised the Food and Drug Administration of its recall and is working with the agency in coordinating the recall.
 The estimated cost of the recall will be included in the firm's fourth quarter 1990 operating results expected to be released in late March.
 Duramed said it was unable to estimate the cost of the recall, but figured it would be ''material.'' The estimated cost of the recall will be included in the firm's fourth quarter 1990 operating results expected to be released in late March.

 

End of Document


AM-Heart-Drug-Recall ; TOR OUT; ; Heart drug recalled
The Canadian Press (CP)
July 21, 1998 Tuesday

 Copyright 1998 Press News Limited, All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL GENERAL NEWS
Length: 130 words
Dateline: TORONTO
Body



TORONTO (CP) - Health Canada has issued a recall warning to patients using the heart drug Lanoxin, which contains Digoxin.
A batch of the 0.25 mg prescription tablets, marketed by Glaxo Wellcome, may be more potent than they should be, creating the possibility of life-threatening side effects.
The batch contains tablets of different thicknesses resulting in different potency, Heath Canada said.
-BODY- Early signs of Digoxin overdose can include nausea and vomiting. Life threatening arrhythmia or heart palpitations may also occur.
The batch was only distributed in Ontario and Quebec.
Health Canada stresses that patients should not stop taking the drug and call the pharmacy if concerned.
The affected tablets were in lot 8C401 which has an expiry date of March 1, 2001.
Toronto Sun
 Load-Date: October 11, 2002

 

End of Document


String of drug recalls raises questions about FDA approval;  NATIONAL NEWS BRIEFS
LANCASTER NEW ERA (LANCASTER, PA.)
July 11, 1998, Saturday

 Copyright 1998 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: NEWS,
Length: 518 words
Body




WASHINGTON (AP) - Almost as many prescription drugs were yanked off the U.S. market in the past 10 months as were banned in the entire previous decade, a spate that has critics questioning if the Food and Drug Administration's safety nets are breaking down.
A senator has persuaded Congress' General Accounting Office to investigate whether the FDA - under political pressure to speed approvals - is doing enough to safeguard against risky medicines, or is passing drugs that once would have been held up for further study. One longtime FDA pharmacologist told The Associated Press that she just left the agency in frustration with pressure to skim over safety concerns.
AP#NATBRIEFS.U1#
The message was that "one should be approving things, not questioning problems that arise, and … give the drug company the benefit of the doubt," said Elizabeth Barbehenn, who spent 13 years at FDA monitoring the safety of certain experimental drugs.
Dr. Michael Friedman, FDA's acting commissioner, vehemently denies that outside pressure influences drug-safety decisions.
The FDA appropriately approved the later-banned drugs because the full scope of side effects did not show up at first - and the system worked by catching them as soon as they did appear, Friedman said.
Five drugs have been pulled off the market since September: The painkiller Duract for causing liver failure, including four deaths and eight liver transplants; the blood pressure drug Posicor, after 400 injuries and 24 deaths when it interacted dangerously with other medications; the diet drugs fenfluramine and Redux for damaging hearts; and the antihistamine Seldane, which interacted lethally with a long list of other drugs.
In the previous 10 years, the FDA had banned just six other drugs.
 York man executed in S.C.
COLUMBIA, S.C. (AP) - Four months after his cousin was executed for the racially tinged torture and murder of a black woman 20 years ago, John Plath met the same fate.
Plath, 43, of York, Pa., was pronounced dead by lethal injection at 6:22 p.m. Friday, state Corrections Department spokesman John Barkley said.
Plath, who quoted Bible verses in the death chamber, still professed his innocence in his final handwritten statement, read by defense attorney David Voisin. "I did not kill the woman. I was 500 feet away sitting in a car," Plath said. "Killing me offends the peace and dignity of God."
Before the curtain to the glass partition opened, Plath could be heard praying in a high-pitched voice. Seconds before he died, he mouthed words to three relatives of his victim who witnessed the execution.
Betty Gardner, 33, was hitchhiking on St. Helena Island when she was picked up by Plath; his cousin John Arnold, who was executed in March; an adult woman; and a 12-year-old girl.
The men, both white, later stabbed and strangled Gardner, and Arnold carved "KKK" into her body, according to trial testimony.
"This murder has left a void in our lives that we will never fill… Now with the death of Betty's murderers, we can continue to move forward," Gardner's family said in a statement. The witnesses did not want their names used.
 Load-Date: October 14, 1999

 

End of Document


Importer ordered to recall drug
The Daily Yomiuri
August 2, 1997, Saturday

 Copyright 1997 The Daily Yomiuri
 
Length: 149 words
Byline: Yomiuri
Body




The Tokyo metropolitan government on Thursday ordered a trader to halt sales and recall a U.S. drug that contained stimulants, a violation of the Drugs, Cosmetics and Medical Instruments Law.
The government issued similar orders to 12 importers that distributed diet products containing herbs such as mahuang and rhubarb, which are allowed only in pharmaceutical products.
A company in Shibuya Ward, Tokyo, imported 10,000 packages of Sextacy, which contained the stimulant ephedrine hydrochloride.
Sextacy, which costs about 6,000 yen for a package containing 10 350-milligram tablets, is one of the popular "legal drugs" being used by young people, experts said.
The stimulant's side effects include insomnia and nausea, and habitual usage can lead to hallucinations, they added. Under Japanese law, the chemical may be used only in small quantities in pharmaceutical products such as cough medicine.
 Load-Date: August 2, 1997

 

End of Document


Shares hit by drug recall: Warner-Lambert and Sankyo see falls after Glaxo withdraws diabetes remedy
Financial Times (London,England)
December 2, 1997, Tuesday
LONDON EDITION 1

 Copyright 1997 The Financial Times Limited
Section: FRONT PAGE - COMPANIES & MARKETS;; Stories
Length: 438 words
Byline: By Daniel Green and Paul Abrahams in Tokyo
Dateline: Tokyo
Body




Glaxo Wellcome, the world's second largest drugs company, yesterday withdrew one of its most promising new drugs, diabetes treatment Romozin, following reports of liver problems in patients.
The move hurt the share prices of Warner-Lambert, the US company which has US marketing rights for the drug and sells it as Rezulin, and Sankyo of Japan, which invented it under the name troglitazone.
Warner Lambert shares had fallen $ 25 7/8 to $ 114 3/8 by mid-session in New York yesterday. Sankyo shares fell Y20 to Y4050 on an otherwise good day for the Tokyo market. Glaxo shares were up 40p to 1340p in a rising market but failed to make up the fall suffered on Friday for reasons relating to the new Stock Exchange trading system.
Glaxo said it withdrew the drug it had been selling since October 11 because it needed time "to evaluate further the safety profile of troglitazone".
But Warner-Lambert, which has been selling it since April, said it would not withdraw the drug, citing Food and Drug Administration figures showing about 150 "adverse events" and three deaths out of 800,000 people treated.
The FDA, which oversees the US drugs markets, said doctors should increase monitoring of patients, and said the potential for liver damage should be more prominently shown on packaging. Last month both Glaxo and Warner wrote to doctors following early reports of liver problems among a small number of patients.
One senior industry figure said it was commercially easier for Glaxo to withdraw the drug because although important, Rezulin was not vital to the prosperity of the company. However, the drug held out the prospect of transforming the fortunes of Warner Lambert and Sankyo.
Stuart Adkins, pharmaceuticals analyst at Lehman Brothers, said: "Troglitazone is worth one per cent of the value of the Glaxo share price, according to our net present value model, whereas for Warner Lambert it is about eight per cent."
Mitsuo Ohmi, pharmaceuticals analyst at Dresdner Kleinwort Benson, had expected the drug, known as Noscal in Japan, to become Sankyo's second most important medicine, generating sales and royalties of Y60bn (£277m) by 2000 - about 10 per cent of its pharmaceuticals turnover.
"Our assumption is that sales will continue in the US and Japan, but there is undoubtedly a risk that it will be withdrawn. It is very strange that Glaxo-Wellcome has pulled the drug while Sankyo and Warner-Lambert continue to market it," said Mr Ohmi.
Troglitazone works by making the body more sensitive to insulin already present, rather than artificially boosting levels of the hormone.
 Load-Date: December 2, 1997

 

End of Document


Drug alert prompts pill recall
The Dominion (Wellington)
April 4, 1996, Thursday

 Copyright 1996 Wellington Newspapers Limited
Section: NEWS; NATIONAL;
Length: 615 words
Byline: VASIL Anamika
Body




A WIDELY available dietary supplement, Thermo Blast II, was taken off the market yesterday because it is likely to contain a prescription drug that experts say can be fatal in large doses.
The Health Ministry ordered the recall of the product, which has been on the market for about six months.
It also urged people not to take any herbal remedies or dietary supplements containing either ephedrine or the herb ephedra, a natural source of ephedrine.
In New Zealand -- unlike many other countries, including Australia -- dietary supplements are not subjected to the same controls as medicines.
However, the Medicines Act 1981 classifies ephedrine and its salts as pharmacy-only medicines and therefore they cannot be present in a dietary supplement or herbal remedy.
Thermo Blast II is sold by gyms and health food shops as a dietary supplement.
The ministry ordered the recall after it was reported yesterday that the product was being used in large doses and had become popular among nightclub patrons and body builders.
Institute of Environmental Science and Research scientist Ralph Richardson, who tested the pills for Radio New Zealand, confirmed they contained ephedrine, though there was a slight chance the ingredient was pseudo-ephedrine, a related drug that was used as a decongestant.
ESR was also testing two other products manufactured by the same company, Extreme and T5, for ephedrine.
The ministry has asked ESR to conduct further tests to confirm its earlier findings and the results are not expected for several days.
Wellington Clinical School associate professor of medicine, Tim Maling, said so-called herbal remedies containing ephedrine, if they had high enough concentrations of the drug, could lead to a heart attack. The danger was greater if they were taken with hay fever medication and Prozac.
In New Zealand, ephedrine was used mainly as a decongestant, he said.
The ministry said ephedrine had pronounced stimulating effects on the nervous system. In therapeutic doses it could cause high blood pressure.
After an overdose, it could cause paranoid psychosis, delusions and hallucinations.
Common side-effects from its use included psychotic states, fear, anxiety, restlessness, tremor, insomnia, confusion and irritability.
It is the second time the ministry has acted against the New Zealand distributor of the pills, NJM Fitness Products, which last year had to recall another product containing ephedra, Thermo Blast I, which unlike Thermo Blast II was labelled as containing the drug.
NJM manager Simon Rothwell said the company had not been aware Thermo Blast II was being used by people to get high or build muscles. The product was sold as an aid to improve health and wellbeing.
Thermo Blast II was supposed to be an ephedrine-free re-formulation of Thermo Blast I. Thermo Blast's American manufacturer, All American Nutritional Supplements, had assured NJM that the product did not contain ephedrine.
The company had begun contacting retailers late yesterday to recall the product.
Health shops spoken to yesterday said Thermo Blast II was a popular seller.
A man, who wanted to be known only as Mike, was reported as saying many people were using it as a recreational drug, with some taking five pills at once.
He said they made people become "quite hyperactive" and "high" for about five or six hours, but the next morning they felt very depressed and weepy.
The ministry said the Therapeutics Products Bill, now being prepared, would bring supplements under the same umbrella as medicines.
--------------------
CAPTION:
Photo MARK ROUND
Dr Richardson takes samples of dietary supplements, including Thermo Blast II, to test for the presence of the prescription drug ephedrine
 Load-Date: October 10, 1996

 

End of Document


DAINIPPON PHARMACEUTICAL RECALLING DRUGS
Jiji Press Ticker Service
JULY 22, 1996, MONDAY

 Copyright 1996 Jiji Press Ltd.
Length: 139 words
Dateline: OSAKA, JULY 22
Body




DAINIPPON PHARMACEUTICAL CO. SAID MONDAY IT HAS STARTED RECALLING IMPORTED DRUGS BECAUSE OF A POSSIBILITY THAT THEY CONTAIN BRITISH COW FAT.
THE PRODUCTS BEING RECALLED ARE FERO-GRADUMETE, SHIPPED BETWEEN JANUARY 1994 AND JUNE 1996, MEDIHALER-ISO, SHIPPED BETWEEN MARCH 1994 AND JUNE 1996, AND MEDIHALER-D, SHIPPED BETWEEN APRIL 1994 AND JUNE 1996, COMPANY OFFICIALS SAID.  FERO-GRADUMETE, AN AGENT FOR TREATING ANEMIA, IS MANUFACTURED BY ABBOTT LABORATORIES LTD. OF BRITAIN, WHILE MEDIHALER, PRODUCED BY 3M HEALTH CARE LTD., ALSO BASED IN BRITAIN, IS AN BRONCHIAL DILATOR.  BEGINNING IN APRIL, THE HEALTH AND WELFARE MINISTRY INSTRUCTED JAPANESE PHARMACEUTICAL MAKERS NOT TO MANUFACTURE OR IMPORT DRUGS USING INGREDIENTS FROM BRITISH COWS FOR FEAR OF A POSSIBLE SPREAD OF SO-CALLED MAD COW DISEASE, A LETHAL BRAIN CONDITION.
 Load-Date: July 23, 1996

 

End of Document


Osaka drug company starts recalling allergy drug
Japan Economic Newswire
APRIL 2, 1996, TUESDAY

 Copyright 1996 Kyodo News Service
Length: 182 words
Dateline: KOBE, April 2 Kyodo
Body




Kyowa Pharm Industry Co., an Osaka-based drug company, is recalling its drug for treatment of allergic coryza and nettle rashes because an alien chemical has been found in the product, company officials said Tuesday.
The company has told the Hyogo prefectural government that it is recalling all the 1.93 million tablets of the drug, 'histablock,' that were made at its plant in Sanda, Hyogo Prefecture, and shipped between late January and March.
The chemical mixed into the drug is harmless to humans, the company said, adding it has heard no report of any effect on the human body so far.
The company investigated into the drug after the Italian company that produced the material for the drug notified it that a small amount of a chemical was mixed into the material during the production process.
Kyowa discovered that 0.01 milligram of the chemical was included in every eight tablets of the drug.
Of the 2 million tablets manufactured at the Sanda plant in September last year, 1.93 million had already been shipped.  The company then started the recall Thursday.
 Load-Date: April 2, 1996

 

End of Document


HOKURIKU SEIYAKU RECALLS BRITISH DRUG
Jiji Press Ticker Service
JULY 25, 1996, THURSDAY

 Copyright 1996 Jiji Press Ltd.
Length: 176 words
Dateline: FUKUI, JULY 25
Body




HOKURIKU SEIYAKU CO. WILL RECALL AN IMPORTED MEDICINE DUE TO A POSSIBILITY THAT IT CONTAINS INGREDIENTS MADE FROM BRITISH COW FAT, COMPANY OFFICIALS SAID THURSDAY.
THE KATSUYAMA, FUKUI-BASED DRUG MAKER WILL RECALL HOKUNALIN AEROSOL, A BRONCHIAL DILATOR, IMPORTED FROM 3M HEALTH CARE LTD. OF BRITAIN BETWEEN APRIL 1994 AND SEPTEMBER 1995.  THE COMPANY LAUNCHED AN INVESTIGATION AFTER THE MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND WELFARE INSTRUCTED JAPAN'S PHARMACEUTICAL MAKERS IN APRIL NOT TO PRODUCE OR IMPORT DRUGS USING INGREDIENTS MADE FROM BRITISH COW FAT FOR FEAR OF A POSSIBLE SPREAD OF THE SO-CALLED MAD COW DISEASE.  HOKURIKU SEIYAKU IS RECALLING THE PRODUCT, THOUGH THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION HAS GIVEN AN ASSURANCE THAT FULLY REFINED COW FAT POSES NO DANGER OF SPREADING THE DISEASE, WHICH HAS BEEN LINKED TO CREUZFELDT-JAKOB DISEASE, A LETHAL HUMAN BRAIN ILLNESS.  ANOTHER DRUG MAKER, DAINIPPON PHARMACEUTICAL CO., ANNOUNCED EARLIER IN THE WEEK THAT IT HAS STARTED RECALLING DRUGS IMPORTED FROM BRITAIN THAT ARE ALSO FEARED TO CONTAIN BRITISH COW FAT.
 Load-Date: July 26, 1996

 

End of Document


Drug recall puts shadow on approval process; Not so fast: Removal of pain-reliever Duract, other drugs raises procedural questions
The Atlanta Journal and Constitution
June 24, 1998, Wednesday,
ALL EDITIONS

 Copyright 1998 The Atlanta Constitution
Section: NEWS; Pg. 03A; Pg. 03A
Length: 490 words
Byline: Jeff Nesmith
Series: Metro Final Today's News
Dateline: Washington
Body




The Food and Drug Administration, under fire a decade ago for moving too slowly to get potentially life-saving medicines approved, is now being criticized from the opposite direction: for allowing unsafe medicines to reach consumers. The agency announced Monday that the maker of Duract, a popular prescription pain reliever, was withdrawing the drug because of reports linking it to a high incidence of liver damage.
It was the third recall of an approved prescription drug in the past nine months. The FDA said it had learned of four patients who died and eight others who have had to undergo liver transplants after taking Duract, which the agency licensed just over a year ago. Duract, known generically as bromfenac, belongs to a class of medicines known as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatories. A comparable drug is ibuprofen. At the time Duract was licensed, clinical trials had revealed an elevation in enzymes associated with liver failure, and its recommended use was limited to no more than 10 days. Doctors are generally free to prescribe drugs "off label" and ignore such recommendations once the substance is licensed by the FDA. FDA officials and the manufacturer, Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories of St. Davids, Pa., said that among the more than 2.5 million prescriptions of the drug written since September when it went on the market, many were for more than the 10-day limit. Wyeth-Ayerst officials, in a letter to doctors and druggists recommending discontinued use of the drug, said all but one of the 12 known cases of liver failure involved use beyond the 10-day period.
The "voluntary withdrawal," result of an agreement between Wyeth-Ayerst and FDA, marked the third time in the last nine months that prescription drugs have been withdrawn.
Posicor, a hypertension medication, was withdrawn June 8 and the diet drug Redux --- also marketed by Wyeth-Ayerst --- was pulled from druggists' shelves in September. "This drug (Duract) should never have been approved in the first place," said Thomas J. Moore of the Center for Health Policy Research at George Washington University. "Here was a drug that was shown in its clinical testing to be comparable to ibuprofen, with the exception of its toxicity to the liver," he said. Moore, who co-authored an article in the May 20 issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association calling for creation of a national office of drug safety to monitor approved pharmaceuticals, said the FDA was forced to accelerate its review and approval of proposed new drugs as a result of lobbying by the pharmaceutical industry in the late 1980s. Studies by the industry-funded Center for the Study of Drug Development at Tufts University in Boston show that after Congress passed the Prescription Drug User Fee Act in 1992, the FDA reduced by more than half the time it requires to approve a typical application for a new drug license.
 
"But we're not (merely) stamping passports here," Moore said.
 Load-Date: June 25, 1998

 

End of Document


Dublin Mass will recall drug addicts
The Irish Times
January 7, 1999, CITY EDITION

 Copyright 1999 The Irish Times
Section: HOME NEWS; Pg. 4
Length: 106 words
Body




A Mass to commemorate those who died as a result of heroin addiction will be held in St Catherine's Church in Meath Street, Dublin this evening.
99010700016The Mass will follow the switching off of lights on a Christmas tree in Pimlico at 5.45 p.m.
Families of the dead have put wreaths around the tree.
Ms Marie Stanley of the South-West Inner City Network said the organisation wanted to replace the tree with a permanent memorial and a flower garden to heroin victims.
"There was an awful lot of drugs sold there and used there over the years. People said we were mad putting up a tree - that it would be knocked, but it hasn't been touched."
 Load-Date: January 7, 1999

 

End of Document


U.S. firm recalls drug Epinephrine
The Record (Kitchener-Waterloo, Ontario)
December 19, 1991 Thursday Final Edition

 Copyright 1991 Metroland Media Group Ltd
Section: FRONT; Pg. A3; News
Length: 169 words
Dateline: TORONTO
Body




(CP) - A U.S.-based pharmaceutical company is recalling certain lots of its injectable drug Epinephrine, used to treat allergic reactions to bee stings and severe asthma attacks.
Wyeth-Ayerst announced the recall Wednesday, saying tests showed the product is below intended potency.
CP
The voluntary recall affects an estimated two million units of Epinephrine distributed worldwide between Aug. 14, 1989, and July 10, 1990.
In Canada, the product is sold only in emergency treatment kits distributed by Hollister-Stier, Audrey Ashby of Wyeth-Ayerst said in an interview from Philadelphia.
Canadians who have Epinephrine showing the following kit lot numbers should return the product to their retailer for refund or replacement:
ANA-Kit Anaphylaxis Emergency Treatment Kit: AK272 through AK279; ANA-Guard Epinephrine Injection, USP (1:1000): G00017 through G00073; Epinephrine Injection, USP (1:1000) Refill: S218 through S223.
For further information, consumers can call the Wyeth-Ayerst toll-free number: 1-800-879-9938.
 Load-Date: October 10, 2002

 

End of Document


Ben Stiller Recalls Drug Episode
Associated Press Online
October 23, 1998; Friday 15:54 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Entertainment, television and culture
Length: 155 words
Dateline: LOS ANGELES
Body




You're 16. You've just dropped two tabs of acid. The visions are ripping through your head, so what do you do?
You're a Ben Stiller person if you said, ''Call your parents.''
Years ago, a drug-addled young Stiller caught up with his parents, comedians Jerry Stiller and Anne Meara, as they filmed an episode of ''The Love Boat.''
''I was scared and I didn't know who to talk to,'' the actor told Rolling Stone. ''I didn't have that many close friends in high school. Luckily my dad was really open.''
How did Dad handle things?
''I said, first, that I didn't want him to feel guilty,'' the elder Stiller said. ''I also had to explain to him that his mind was OK. He was so concerned. It was one of the closest places we've ever been together.''
The younger Stiller stars as an out-of-control heroin addict in ''Permanent Midnight'' and an angst-ridden adolescent who gets his penis caught in his zipper in ''There's Something About Mary.''
 Load-Date: October 23, 1998

 

End of Document


Mitsubishi Chemical to recall drugs after fragment found
Japan Economic Newswire
DECEMBER 18, 1995, MONDAY

 Copyright 1995 Kyodo News Service
Length: 166 words
Dateline: TOKYO, Dec. 18 Kyodo
Body




Mitsubishi Chemical Corp., the nation's largest comprehensive chemical maker, said Monday it is recalling nearly 450,000 bottles of four kinds of drugs after a metal fragment was found in a container of one of its antiasthma drugs.
The company said it plans to recall 446,000 bottles of drugs, from around 16,500 medical institutions nationwide, which were made in the same process as that of the container in which the 6-millimeter fragment was found Dec. 6 at a drugstore in Fukuoka Prefecture.
Only about 55,000 bottles will actually be collected, however, since most of the drugs have already been used.
Mitsubishi Chemical says it has received no reports of problems with any other containers.
The company believes the fragment fell off a machine during manufacturing of the drugs at a plant in Ibaraki Prefecture.
A company official said such foreign material is likely to be found by a pharmacist since the drug is handed to a patient after the pharmacist prepares it.
 Load-Date: December 18, 1995

 

End of Document


CHINA-NARCOTICS: ANTI-DRUG CAMPAIGN RECALLS THE OPIUM WAR
IPS-Inter Press Service
June 13, 1997, Friday

 Copyright 1997 IPS-Inter Press Service/Global Information Network
Length: 808 words
Byline: By Antoaneta Bezlova
Dateline: BEIJING, June 13
Body




In the run-up to Hong Kong's handover, China has turned a 19th century imperial commissioner whose attempt to stop the British opium trade sparked a war and led to the ceding of Hong Kong into a hero.
Lin Zexu, once in disgrace because of his role in the "150 years of national humiliations" inflicted on China by Western powers, is now being hailed as "the first national hero to fight foreign invaders in modern Chinese history."
Tributes to his memory were paid at a mammoth ceremony in the town of Humen in the southern province of Guangdong, neighboring Hong Kong. Five hundred kilograms of drugs were burned at the spot where Lin Zexu had destroyed 1.15 million kilograms of British opium on June 3, 1839.
The event 158 years ago triggered the Opium War, which is regarded by many Chinese historians as marking the beginning of modern Chinese history. Eight western armies invaded the country, thus breaking China's self-imposed isolation under the Qing dynasty.
The Qing dynasty was the last of China's great kingdoms, spanning four centuries, from 1664 to 1911.
The war ended with the signing of the Nanjing Treaty under which the Qing ruler was forced to hand over Hong Kong to Britain. For his role in the debacle, Lin Zexu was banished by Emperor Daoguang to the remote western region of Xinjiang.
With the transfer drawing close, not only is Lin's house in Fuzhou, Fujian province, being restored and turned into a museum with a public park around it, but he is being featured as a national hero in a new film, "The Opium War," which is to be shown across China at the end of June. A 18-part serial on his life starts this week on Beijing television.
"Lin Zexu had many achievements to celebrate but this campaign is all to do with the return of Hong Kong," says his great-great-grandson, Ling Qing, who was China's permanent representative to the U.N in 1985.
The imperial commissioner wasn't always a hero, Ling Qing points out, recalling how Lin Zexu was vilified for his loyalty to the Qing dynasty during the years of the Cultural Revolution. In those days, being a descendent of an imperial commissioner made life difficult, he adds.
Times have changed, and today Ling Qing is president of the Lin Zexu Foundation, created in 1995, which claims to be the only non-governmental organization in China involved in a massive countrywide campaign against drugs.
So far the foundation has received donations worth more than 10 million yuan ($ 1.2 million) from overseas Chinese, which has been used to finance a TV series, publications, and various other activities in memory of Lin Zexu. Lin Xexu's historical rehabilitation is being projected as evidence of China's resolve to combat drug abuse. That he was one of the earliest anti-drug campaigners is the message being broadcast.
At the memorial ceremony on June 3, which was attended by some 15,000 local people, Bai Jingfu, vice-minister of Public Security was quoted by the official Xinhua News Agency as saying, "This event shows China's confidence and determination to crack down on drug problems and marks the 158th anniversary of the Humen opium burning event."
In the months preceding the event, China launched a huge drive against narcotics, rounding up more than 18,000 drug addicts and traffickers, and executing 12 traffickers and dealers in Guangzhou on May 15.
But Chinese authorities admit that there are now as many as a million drug addicts in the country, according to Xinhua, and almost 80 percent of them are young people. The most seriously affected areas are the provinces of Guangdong and Yunnan, bordering the poppy-growing territories of Southeast and Central Asia.
Lin Zexu's achievements -- his efforts to wipe out the trade in opium which pitted him against the foreign powers -- are tirelessly highlighted by China's press. Over and over again, he is lionized as the first nationalist hero of modern China.
That point was driven home also by Vice-Minister Bai Jingfu at the rally in Humen earlier this month. "We shall never forget the horrendous disasters drugs brought to the Chinese nation, and we shall never allow historical tragedies to repeat themselves" he said.
The fact that such a huge ceremony attended by thousands of people was held in a tiny town just a short way from Hong Kong in the run-up to the handover leaves no doubt about the significance of Lin Zexu's rehabilitation.
At least for the moment, no one is paying very much attention to the fact that the man who has been elevated to the position of national hero for fighting against imperial China's foreign invaders, was also one of the earliest Chinese advocates of western thinking.
His collected works, now on sale in bookstores nationwide, contain rich accounts of life in the West, providing an unprecedented glimpse of the world outside to 19th century Chinese living in a very closed society.
 Load-Date: June 16, 1997

 

End of Document


Health Canada recalls heart drug Lanoxin
The Ottawa Citizen
July 18, 1998, Saturday, FINAL EDITION

 Copyright 1998 CanWest Interactive, a division of CanWest Global Communications Corp. All Rights Reserved
Section: CITY; Pg. C2
Length: 162 words
Byline: THE OTTAWA CITIZEN
Body




 Health Canada issued a limited recall of a common heart drug yesterday in Ontario and Quebec.
The sale of 560 bottles of the drug Lanoxin were halted because some of the tablets might contain more than the prescribed 25 milligrams.
"It could be a serious problem for some individuals. Some could experience arrhythmia (heart palpitations)," said Rachel Dansereau, a Health Canada officer.
The early signs of an overdose of Lanoxin, which could lead to death, are nausea and vomiting. The drug is prescribed to patients with heart conditions.
Pharmacists in the two provinces have been advised to contact patients who may have purchased the recalled drug.
But Lanoxin users are warned not to stop taking the drug, as they will be contacted immediately if they are at any risk.
The manufacturer, Glaxo Wellcome, believes this is an isolated incident and has thoroughly inspected other batches finding no irregularities, Health Canada reported.
 Load-Date: July 19, 1998

 

End of Document


Copley recalls allergy drug Brompheril
United Press International
September 14, 1994, Wednesday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 U.P.I.
Section: Domestic News
Length: 109 words
Dateline: CANTON, Mass., Sept. 14
Body




Copley Pharmaceutical Inc. Wednesday recalled an over-the-counter allergy drug because of concerns over a coating process.
The Canton, Mass.-based company said the recall of the antihistamine Brompheril does not result from any concern about the safety or effectiveness of the product.  The company also disclosed a federal grand jury in Boston has subpoenaed all documents relating to Brompheril.  Copley said the recall is due to a lack of assurance that the coating process was conducted in accordance with batch records.  Copley markets its products to distributors, retail chains, wholesalers, hospitals, government agencies and managed-care entities.
 Load-Date: September 15, 1994

 

End of Document


3M Recalls Migraine Drug
The New York Times
September 11, 1991, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 1991 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Financial Desk
Section: Section D;; Section D; Page 8; Column 5; Financial Desk; Column 5;
Length: 188 words
Byline: AP
Dateline: MAPLEWOOD, Minn., Sept. 10
Body




The 3M Company has voluntarily recalled one lot of a prescription drug for treating migraine headaches after some customers reported nausea and vomiting.
The recall involves nearly 24,000 units of a hand-held aerosol drug inhaler called Medihaler Ergotamine with Oral Adaptor that was distributed in the United States and Australia, said Karyn Goad, a spokeswoman for 3M's pharmaceuticals division.
The affected products carry the lot number 901346, Ms. Goad said. A patient who has the product can contact the pharmacy where it was bought or the physician who prescribed it.
The Food and Drug Administration said the problem with the recalled inhalers was not life-threatening.
So far, 3M has not determined what caused the problem, Ms. Goad said. The company manufactures the inhaler in Northridge, Calif.
The company learned about the problem from doctors who reported nausea and vomiting in their patients, she said.
Because all the incidents occurred within a six-week period in May and early June, the company was able to trace the problem to a single lot of manufactured products, a total of 23,766 inhaler units, Ms. Goad added.
 Load-Date: September 11, 1991

 

End of Document


2 Top Diet Drugs Are Recalled Amid Reports of Heart Defects
The New York Times
September 16, 1997, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 1997 The New York Times Company
Distribution: National Desk 
Section: Section A; ; Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 1456 words
Byline: By GINA KOLATA 
 By GINA KOLATA 
Body




The makers of two popular diet drugs announced yesterday that they were withdrawing them from the market at the request of the Food and Drug Administration, which said new information indicates that the drugs may cause heart valve damage in as many as 30 percent of people who take them.
The drugs are fenfluramine, or Pondimin, and dexfenfluramine, or Redux, and are often used in combination with phentermine, an amphetamine-like drug, as part of the combination known as fen-phen.
Dr. Michael A. Friedman, the acting commissioner of the F.D.A., said evidence that the drugs caused the heart defects was not ironclad, nor was it known whether the defects produced health problems. Nevertheless, he said, the agency was taking the issue seriously.
"We're encouraging patients to stop taking the drugs today," Dr. Friedman said, adding that there should be no medical problems resulting from an abrupt withdrawal from the drugs. He said that it was as yet unclear what the long-term consequences of using the drugs were for people who have valve damage, but do not have overt symptoms of trouble, like shortness of breath and tiredness.
"If these problems don't progress or if they improve, then the patients might be just fine," Dr. Friedman said. "But we don't know that right now."
Dr. Marc W. Deitch, senior vice president for medical affairs and global medical director for Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories, which makes fenfluramine and distributes dexfenfluramine, said the company was conducting its own studies of the association between the diet pills and heart valve defects and is putting together a panel of 10 independent experts to assess data.
In the meantime, he added, the company decided that withdrawing the drugs from the market was the prudent thing to do.
In recent years, the dexfenfluramine and fenfluramine had been hailed as miracle pills for obesity. Doctors wrote 18 million prescriptions for them last year, often giving one or the other of them in a "fen-phen" combination with phentermine. Commercial diet centers provided them to the overweight and some individual doctors virtually dedicated their practices to prescribing phen-fen to the obese as well as to people who merely wanted to lose a few pounds.
The drugs depress appetite and phentermine increases the rate at which calories are burned. Experts insist that it is possible to lose weight without drugs [Page, F10.]
The diet drugs had been approved for short-term use only in the treatment of obesity -- fenfluramine decades ago and dexfenfluramine recently. The F.D.A. had never approved the fen-phen combination, but once the agency approves a drug, doctors may prescribe it at will.
It has been known for several years that fenfluramine and dexfenfluramine can cause an often fatal heart condition called pulmonary hypertension, but that complication was thought to be very rare, occurring in just 40 or 50 out of a million people taking the drug. Fenfluramine had already been approved by the time its association with pulmonary hypertension became known. The food and drug agency approved dexfenfluramine on the ground that the risks of obesity far exceeded the risks of this complication.
Last summer, the first hints of a new danger arose when doctors at the Mayo Clinic reported that the drugs might cause heart valve defects. They described 24 previously healthy women who had developed an unusual and serious valve abnormality after taking the drugs. The Government then asked doctors to report other cases of heart valve defects in people taking diet pills. As a result, said Dr. Friedman, "we now have something in excess of 90 cases" of patients with symptomatic heart valve abnormalities.
After reports of these patients began coming in, doctors at five medical centers independently examined the heart valves of 291 patients who were taking the diet drugs and who had not complained of symptoms, Dr. Friedman said. Most were women and their average age was in the mid-forties.
Echocardiograms, which are images of a beating heart made with sound waves, revealed that a third of those patients tested had abnormalities in their aortic or mitral valves of a type that would not be expected in people so young.
Moreover, Dr. Friedman said, 24 of these patients, by chance, had had echocardiograms before they started taking the diet drugs, and those tests showed no valve problems. Eight of the 24 developed valve problems after they took the drugs.
While cautioning that the body of evidence implicating the diet drugs is not "absolutely concrete," Dr. Friedman said that it nonetheless is "a very convincing case."
So on Thursday morning, F.D.A. officials asked representatives of Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories, a division of American Home Products, and Interneuron Pharmaceuticals Inc., a small biotechnology company that makes dexfenfluramine, to come to the agency's headquarters on Friday to hear some new information about the drugs. When the company officials arrived, agency officials told them about the findings in patients without symptoms and asked them to withdraw the drugs from the market.
"We were certainly quite surprised," said Dr. Deitch of Wyeth-Ayerst. But, he added, "when we saw this information, we realized these were new findings, in asymptomatic individuals." And so, he said, "the most prudent thing was to withdraw the drugs from the market."
Wyeth-Ayerst set up a toll-free information line, 1-800-892-2718.
Both American Home Products and Interneuron will suffer financially. American Home Products estimated that the cost of withdrawing the drugs will be $200 million to $300 million, or 20 cents to 30 cents per share after taxes. Its stock closed yesterday at 73 1/4, down 311/16 .
Interneuron will be hit even harder, because dexfenfluramine is its only product on the market, said William B. Boni, a company spokesman. He said the drug's sales brought in about $14 million so far this year and added that the idea of using dexfenfluramine for weight loss was "one of the keystones on which the company was founded." Interneuron's stock closed yesterday at 17 7/8, down 111/16 .
Drug recalls are highly unusual. The F.D.A. says that just 12 drugs have been withdrawn from the market in the past 17 years. But in this case, said Dr. Alan Hillman, who directs the Center for Health Policy at the University of Pennsylvania, the companies really had no choice.
"With these statistics, for a company to leave a drug on the market, they are asking for class-action suits in the billions of dollars." But still, the question remains, why weren't these problems noticed before? Dexfenfluramine had been used by dieters in Europe for decades.
Dr. Friedman said he could only speculate. No one had initially thought to examine patients' hearts, he said, because animal studies had never revealed heart abnormalities and heart valve defects are not normally associated with drug use.
Until recently, the drugs were not prescribed for long periods of time and so, Dr. Friedman said, with only short-term use, "it may be that the chance of having an abnormality is much much smaller."
Long-term use began with the publication of a small study in July of 1992 in which obese patients who took fenfluramine and phentermine for years on end lost some of their excess weight and kept it off. Encouraged by these results, many doctors had told patients to take the drugs or the drug combination indefinitely, reasoning that obesity would come roaring back if patients stopped taking the drugs.
Another reason the heart valve problem, if it is connected to the drugs, might have been missed is that doctors who saw patients with valve defects might never have thought to associate them with diet pills, said Dr. Anthony N. DeMaria, the chief of cardiology at the University of California in San Diego and a former president of the American College of Cardiology.
"Any given physician might see this in only one or two patients," Dr. DeMaria said. Most patients coming into a doctor's office would not have been taking the drugs, most who were taking the drugs would not have the heart valve defects, and most who had the defects would have had no symptoms, he said.
Of course, it might also be asked how the drugs, approved only for recalcitrant obesity, ended up in the hands of so many people.
Dr. Jules Hirsch, an obesity researcher at Rockefeller University, said that with a third of the country obese, and even the slightly overweight desperate to be thin, "the pressure to prescribe drugs is enormous." He said some doctors became rich giving out the drugs and others gave in to pressure. Even Dr. Hirsch, who does not treat obesity, has been inundated.
"People called me all the time, saying, 'Can't you get me the drugs?' " Dr. Hirsch said.
      
 Load-Date: September 16, 1997

 

End of Document


FDA ORDERS EMERGENCY RECALL OF DRUG
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
March 30, 1990, FRIDAY, THREE STAR Edition

 Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 18A
Length: 120 words
Body




WASHINGTON - An emergency recall has been issued for a blood-thinning drug mislabeled as an anti-depressant, the Food and Drug Administration announced Thursday.
The product being recalled is a generic version of the blood-thinning drug warfarin, made by Pharmaceutical Basics Inc. of Denver. The drug was sold in packaging erroneously labeling it as the antidepressant Desipramine, FDA spokeswoman Eva Kemper said.  The recall is classified as a Class One, signifying an immediate life-threatening situation, Kemper said.  Warfarin typically is given to patients prone to strokes and blood clots, because it thins their blood and prevents clotting. Desipramine is typically prescribed to relieve the symptoms of depression.
 Load-Date: October 14, 1993

 

End of Document


Health Canada recalls heart drug
The Record (Kitchener-Waterloo, Ontario)
July 21, 1998 Tuesday Final Edition

 Copyright 1998 Metroland Media Group Ltd
Section: FRONT; Pg. A2; News
Length: 128 words
Dateline: TORONTO
Body




TORONTO -- Health Canada has issued a recall warning to patients using the heart drug Lanoxin, which contains Digoxin.
A batch of the 0.25 mg prescription tablets, marketed by Glaxo Wellcome, may be more potent than they should be, creating the possibility of life-threatening side effects.
Canadian Press
The batch contains tablets of different thicknesses resulting in different potency, Heath Canada said.
Early signs of Digoxin overdose can include nausea and vomiting. Life threatening arrhythmia or heart palpitations may also occur.
The batch was only distributed in Ontario and Quebec.
Health Canada stresses that patients should not stop taking the drug and call the pharmacy if concerned.
The affected tablets were in lot 8C401 which has an expiry date of March 1, 2001.
 Load-Date: September 22, 2002

 

End of Document


HEART DRUG RECALLED
COURIER-MAIL
September 2, 1992 Wednesday

 Copyright 1992 Nationwide News Pty Limited
Length: 108 words
Byline: AAPGROUP
Body




Heart drug recalled SYDNEY: About 1800 bottles of the drug, Coumadin, prescribed to thin the blood of heart patients and others susceptible to clotting, were recalled by the Boots pharmaceutical company yesterday.
QNPAn official of the New South Wales-based company said last night the Coumadin tablets were labelled on the outside packaging as containing 7.5mg of the drug. They contained 7.5mg, but each tablet was stamped 2.5mg. ""People who take Coumadin take prescribed dosages so it is important that these supplies be recalled," the official said. He said taking incorrect dosages could lead to bleeding although this was unlikely to prove fatal .
 Load-Date: September 27, 2003

 

End of Document


Kyowa Pharmaceutical recalling Italian-made drug
Japan Economic Newswire
APRIL 5, 1996, FRIDAY

 Copyright 1996 Kyodo News Service
Length: 98 words
Dateline: OSAKA, April 5 Kyodo
Body




Kyowa Pharmaceutical Industry Co. said Friday it has begun recalling an Italian-made antiasthma drug, Taunus, as it contains an impure substance.
Subject to the recall are 139,900 packages of the drug with production numbers 1050, 1051, 1052 and 1053, which were shipped between October and March, and 86,970 packages in stock, Kyowa said.
The Osaka-based pharmaceutical firm decided to recall the drug following a notice from its maker, Valeas SpA, that it contains an impurity.
The substance holds little danger for humans because its content is minimal, Kyowa said.
 Load-Date: April 5, 1996

 

End of Document


SUMITOMO PHARMACEUTICALS RECALLS ANTISHOCK DRUG
Jiji Press Ticker Service
AUGUST 20, 1998, THURSDAY

 Copyright 1998 Jiji Press Ltd.
Length: 151 words
Dateline: OSAKA, AUG. 20
Body




SUMITOMO PHARMACEUTICALS CO. SAID THURSDAY IT IS CALLING BACK AN ANTISHOCK DRUG FROM JAPANESE HOSPITALS AFTER FOREIGN MATTER WAS FOUND IN ONE SAMPLE.
THE COMPANY HAD NOT RECEIVED ANY REPORT OF HARM BEING CAUSED BY THE U.S.-MADE DRUG, MADE OF CORTICOSTEROID, WHICH IS USED TO EASE SHOCK RESULTING FROM INJURIES AND BLEEDING.  IT WILL COLLECT 9,576 CASES OF THE DRUG SHIPPED IN FEBRUARY TO 3,607 MEDICAL INSTITUTIONS ACROSS JAPAN. EACH CASE CONTAINS 5 BOTTLES.  A FRAGMENT 1.5 CENTIMETERS LONG AND ONE MILLIMETER WIDE WAS FOUND IN THE PRODUCT IN A HOSPITAL IN KANAGAWA PREFECTURE, EAST OF TOKYO, SUMITOMO PHARMACEUTICALS OFFICIALS SAID.  THE FRAGMENT APPEARS TO BE WOOD THAT WAS CARBONIZED IN THE COURSE OF DRUG'S PRODUCTION, THEY SAID. IT IS NOT LIKELY TO POSE ANY HEALTH HAZARD, THEY SAID.  SUMITOMO PHARMACEUTICALS IMPORTS THE DRUG FROM BRIDGEWATER, NEW JERSEY-BASED PHARMACIA AND UPJOHN INC.
 Load-Date: August 21, 1998

 

End of Document


Blood-clotting drug recalled
September 25, 1997, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 168 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A blood-clotting drug is being recalled because of contamination by an organism that could cause life-threatening infection in people with weakened immune systems.
Two lots of Amicar Syrup 25% were found during routine testing to contain the organism, Candida parapsilosis, said Immunex Corp., the Seattle-based maker of the drug said Wednesday.
Immunex, which initiated the recall with the Food and Drug Administration, said "the risk of infection is remote" and that infection from the organism is treatable with available medications.
However, the company said patients should return any Amicar Syrup 25% received on or after June 1 to the pharmacy where it was purchased. The recall does not involve tablet or intravenous forms of Amicar, Immunex said.
The recalled lot numbers are 445-578 and 446-877,
The drug, known generically as aminocaproic, is used to help a person's blood to clot.
Patients with concerns or questions should contact their medical provider or Immunex Professional Services at 1-800-IMMUNEX.
 Load-Date: September 25, 1997

 

End of Document


Food and Drug Administration announces voluntary recall of frozen mamey
The Associated Press
March 8, 1999, Monday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1999 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 420 words
Byline: By IAN JAMES, Associated Press Writer
Dateline: MIAMI
Body




The Food and Drug Administration announced a voluntary nationwide recall Monday of some frozen mamey products after the fruit was linked to a typhoid fever outbreak that has sickened at least 13 people.
The agency urged customers who bought frozen mamey in clear plastic bags under the "El Sembrador" and "La Fe" brands to return it to the place of purchase for a full refund.
Health officials in Florida linked the typhoid fever cases to frozen packages of mamey, a tropical fruit often used to make shakes called batidos in Spanish-speaking communities.
The frozen mamey is being recalled as a precautionary measure while FDA and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention work with Florida officials to determine the source of the contamination, the FDA said in a news release.
Florida officials ordered all frozen mamey, regardless of brand, removed from shelves in the state last month after interviews with typhoid patients suggested the illness could be traced to the frozen fruit, which has a pulp ranging in color from salmon pink to red.
But the federal recall affected only the two brands and a third product with no brand name produced by Agrodex, Guatemala. That product, imported by Jagua Trading Group Corp. of Miami, is sold in clear plastic packages usually to retailers - not directly to consumers - with the label "Mamey, Mammea americana, Product of Guatemala."
The La Fe brand was distributed in Florida, California, Connecticut, New Jersey, New York, Georgia, Arizona, Illinois, Louisiana, Philadelphia, Massachusetts, Rhode Island and Oregon by Gonzales & Tapanes Foods of Miami and North Bergen, N.J.
The El Sembrador brand was distributed in North Carolina, Illinois, Georgia, Florida and New York by L & J General International Corp. of Miami.
The FDA first issued a warning Feb. 20 that customers should not eat El Sembrador brand frozen mamey from Guatemala or drinks made from the product.
Typhoid fever can cause headache, joint pain, sore throat, constipation, loss of appetite and pink spots on the skin. Prompt treatment with antibiotics cures more than 99 percent of cases.
Salmonella typhi bacteria are excreted in the stool of an infected person and can spread by contaminating food or water. The National Center for Infectious Diseases reported 327 cases of typhoid nationwide last year.
The 13 cases of typhoid fever linked to the mamey between mid-December and Feb. 18 all required hospitalization, according to the FDA. Those cases appeared mostly in Hispanic communities in South Florida.
 Load-Date: March 8, 1999

 

End of Document


With ban, diet-drug users go cold turkey
Bismarck Tribune (North Dakota)
October 1, 1997, Wednesday,
METRO EDITION

 Copyright 1997 The Bismarck Tribune,   a division of Lee Enterprises, Inc.
Length: 566 words
Body




NEW YORK (AP) -- After a year of popping fen-phen and downing Redux, Wendy Block is losing weight the old-fashioned way: eating less and exercising.
"There is no magic pill," said Ms. Block, 58, of Wilmington, N.C., who went from 163 pounds to 143 since quitting the diet drugs and moving into the Structure House weight-loss clinic in nearby Durham last month. "The magic is getting away from the table and getting some exercise."
ASSOCIATED PRESS
Since the recall of the diet drugs Redux and fenfluramine -- one-half of the drug cocktail known as fen-phen -- many of the 6 million patients who used them for a quick weight-loss fix have quit cold turkey.
The diet drug scare is also cutting into sales of another obesity pill, phentermine -- the still-legal half of fen-phen.
Total prescriptions of phentermine have plunged from a weekly peak in April of 258,983 to 123,868 the week Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories, the maker of Redux and fenfluramine, recalled the two drugs, according the research firm IMS America Ltd.
Wyeth-Ayerst pulled the two drugs off the market at the Food and Drug Administration's request after a Mayo Clinic study linked them to potentially fatal heart valve damage.
Some doctors say the scare could have a healthy side effect.
"What I'm hoping happens is people say, 'Hey, I'm going to have to do this myself,'" said Structure House director Gerard J. Musante, a psychologist. "If that point can come out of all this, then perhaps some of the concerns coming out of this would be worth it."
After giving up on an herbal diet aid -- "It made me sick" -- Teresa Smallwood signed up at a Chicago-area Jenny Craig diet center. The chain replaced its offering of diet pills with a traditional weight-loss regimen shortly before the drugs were recalled.
"It's healthier," Ms. Smallwood said of her diet-and-exercise routine. "I feel better than I have in a very long time health-wise. I've already told all my friends not to try diet drugs."
Fenfluramine is not actually a weight-loss drug. Instead, it is given to counter the side effects of phentermine, which include jitters, dry mouth and constipation.
Many diet centers and doctors are still using phentermine, curbing its side effects with antidepressants such as Prozac or Zoloft. And health stores continue to sell "herbal fen-phen," which is chemically different from the prescription fen-phen. Instead, it contains a weight-loss drug called ephedrine.
However, the FDA is considering a ban on weight-loss supplements containing ephedrine.
Meanwhile, the maker of phentermine, Medeva, is offering $ 10 discounts on the first month's prescription, which costs about $ 40. It recently wrote to about 200,000 doctors and 50,000 pharmacists to clarify that the drug was not recalled.
The two recalled drugs accounted for $ 400 million in annual earnings for Wyeth-Ayerst's parent, American Home Products.
Total prescriptions of fenfluramine, trade-named Pondimin, reached a weekly peak of 153,786 in February. Total prescriptions of the chemically related drug Redux, or dexfenfluramine, hit an all-time weekly high of 90,474 in February.
Sales went to zero for both drugs after the recall, and that's not likely to change, said J.R. Stafford, chairman and chief executive of American Home Products.
Even if studies clear the drugs of causing heart valve damage, he said Monday, "we have no plans to reintroduce the products to the market."
 Load-Date: January 15, 1998

 

End of Document


Dainippon to recall drugs with possible 'mad cow' link
Japan Economic Newswire
JULY 22, 1996, MONDAY

 Copyright 1996 Kyodo News Service
Length: 192 words
Dateline: TOKYO, July 22 Kyodo
Body




The Osaka-based pharmaceutical company Dainippon Pharmaceutical Co. said Monday it will recall or exchange pharmaceuticals identified as containing substances derived from British cattle and possibly linked to 'mad cow' disease.
Company officials said one of the products is 'Fero Gradumet,' produced by ABBOTT Laboratories Ltd, and imported prior to July 1995 for use in the treatment of anemia.
The other two are 'Medihaler Iso' and 'Medihaher D,' produced by 3M Health Care Ltd. for the treatment of bronchial asthma.
The officials said the companies are British subsidiaries of U.S. companies.
All the products contain additives derived from British beef tallow.
Despite the move, the officials said that based on opinion from the World Health Organization, the products do not pose a danger to human health.
'Mad cow' disease, also known by its medical name of bovine spongiform encephalopathy, is a debilitating brain condition in cattle.
A 'mad cow' disease scare surfaced in March when British authorities announced a possible link between the disease and a similar one in humans, known as Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease.
 Load-Date: July 22, 1996

 

End of Document


ASTHMA DRUG RECALL
USA TODAY
January 6, 1994, Thursday

 Copyright 1994 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: LIFE; Lifeline; Pg. 1D
Length: 85 words
Byline: By Brenda Ling
Body




Copley Pharmaceutical Inc., of Canton, Mass., said Wednesday it is recalling some of its 20-milliliter Albuterol Sulfate Inhalation Solution, which is widely used by asthma patients and others with breathing problems.  The solution, contaminated by microbial organisms, poses special risks of serious infection to people with compromised immune systems, including those with AIDS, cystic fibrosis, chronic obstructive lung disease and cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy or radiation, the company said.
 Load-Date: October 14, 1994

 

End of Document


Blue Cross Warns Of Drug Recall
PR Newswire
October 2, 1997, Thursday - 12:48 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1997 PR Newswire Association, Inc.
Section: Financial News
Length: 153 words
Dateline: COLUMBIA, S.C., Oct. 2
Body




Blue Cross and Blue Shield of South Carolina would like its customers and the general public to be aware of a drug recall by the Food and Drug Administration.  Two drugs, Redux and Pondimin, have been recalled.
These drugs were widely prescribed for weight reduction.
Dr. Ashby Jordan, Blue Cross corporate Medical Director, said, "We are pleased that the FDA has taken this action.  These drugs, like so many other weight reduction treatments, have proven to have significant adverse effects. This severely limits their appropriate use."
Any one with unused portions of Redux or Pondimin can contact the manufacturer, Wythe Ayerst at 1-800-892-2718 for instructions on obtaining a refund.  Pharmacies cannot accept unused portions of the drugs and are not issuing refunds.
SOURCE  Blue Cross and Blue Shield of South Carolina
    
CONTACT: Donna Thorne, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of South Carolina, 803-788-0222, ext. 42437
 Load-Date: October 3, 1997

 

End of Document


Bayer Yakuhin recalling mislabeled ethical drug
Japan Economic Newswire
JANUARY 22, 1996, MONDAY

 Copyright 1996 Kyodo News Service
Length: 100 words
Dateline: OSAKA, Jan. 22 Kyodo
Body




Bayer Yakuhin Ltd. is recalling a therapeutic drug manufactured and marketed by the company for treatment of high blood pressure and heart disease because of faulty labeling, company officials said Monday.
The officials said almost 80% of the products have been recovered from hospitals and clinics.
They said some 20-milligram tablets have been found in containers labeled as 'Adalat L 10-mg tablets.'
The mislabeled containers were discovered in hospitals in Hyogo Prefecture, the officials said.
They said an excessive intake of the drug could have adverse effects on patients.
 Load-Date: January 22, 1996

 

End of Document


DRUG RECALL ALARMS SOME WITH ASTHMA
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
JANUARY 8, 1994, SATURDAY,
SOONER EDITION

 Copyright 1994 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: LOCAL,
Length: 166 words
Body




Local allergy doctors say their phones have been busy with confused patients calling for guidance after an asthma drug was recalled earlier this week.
''For people with asthma, it's a major ordeal trying to decide what to take,'' said Dr. Barry Asman of Monroeville.
''Many simply stopped taking all their medications.''
The only drug being recalled is 20 milliliter vials of 0.5 percent albuterol sulfate solution for inhalation manufactured by Copley Pharmaceutical Inc. Packages of Copley's 0.083 percent albuterol sulfate solution are not affected.
Copley's albuterol sulfate is distributed under the following brand names: Aligen, Astra, Geneva, Goldline, Harber, Major, Moore, H.L. Moore, Qualitest, Rugby and Schein.
The drug batch being recalled was found to be contaminated with microbes. Asman said the patients most at risk of infection from the inhaled drug were primarily those with AIDS or cystic fibrosis and cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy or others with compromised immune systems.
 Load-Date: September 15, 1994

 

End of Document


TEVA SHARES SUSPENDED IN US ON PRODUCT RECALL
 Pharmaceutical Business News
August 27, 1997

 Copyright 1997 Responsive Database Services, Inc.
All Rights Reserved
Business and Industry
Copyright 1997 Informa UK Ltd.
Section: Pg. 7; No. 13/298; ISSN: 0956-0661
Length: 270 words
Highlight: Trading in Teva's shares on NASDAQ was suspended on 8/12/97 after FDA's demand that Teva recall generic antibiotic, Clindamycin Tevas said reason for recall of the drug was procedural
Body




Trading in Teva's shares on the NASDAQ stock exchange in New York was suspended for more than two hours on 12 August following the FDA's demand that Teva recall the generic antibiotic, Clindamycin, from the shelves.
Teva said the reason for the recall of the drug -which was manufactured at the Biocraft plant in the US - was procedural.
The company explained that the raw material supplier for the drug was recently replaced, since the original supplier had failed to comply with FDA standards. A company that replaces a supplier has to have its raw material re-examined, to ascertain that the new supplier's raw material is identical to that used in the original drug.
However, this re-examination was carried out at the Biocraft plant using a method different from the one required by the FDA.
Since a different examination method had been used, the FDA required the drug to be recalled and the raw material examined once more in accordance with its prescribed method.
Bill Fletcher, chief executive officer of Teva Pharmaceuticals USA, commented: "In response to the FDA's findings, Teva had immediately recalled five batches of Clindamycin. In the first six months of 1997, prior to recall, total sales of the product were less than $2 million, thus having practically no material effect upon earnings. We are co-operating with the FDA and expect this problem to be product specific, and hope to reintroduce Clindamycin later this year."
While the FDA's notice related only to that specific drug, the FDA issued a warning in respect of the Biocraft plant as a whole, asking that other drugs in that plant also be examined.
 Load-Date: December 2, 2004

 

End of Document


HIV test drug recalled
The Times
October 25, 1994, Tuesday

 Copyright 1994 Times Newspapers Limited
Section: Business
Length: 122 words
Byline: By Sarah Bagnall
Body




HOECHST, the German chemicals group, is recalling Enzygnost, its HIV test drug, at the instruction of the Federal Agency for Sera and Vaccines.
 The worldwide recall was ordered by the agency after a test of a blood sample in June failed to recognise HIV antibodies.
The City said the cost of the recall would not be significant as the drug's usage is limited. The drug is estimated to be used by about 400 Aids patients.
 Peter McDougall, an analyst at Barclays de Zoete Wedd, said: ''This is an experimental drug. The company knows exactly which doctors are prescribing the drug. It will not be costly to recall.''
 The company has the right to appeal against the Federal Agency for Sera and Vaccines' decision.
 Load-Date: October 26, 1994

 

End of Document


FDA DRUG RECALLS RAISE CONCERNS ABOUT SAFETY / A SENATOR WANTS TO KNOW WHETHER THE AGENCY IS APPROVING RISKY MEDICINE UNDER POLITICAL PRESSURE.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
JULY 11, 1998 Saturday D EDITION

 Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved
 
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. D01
Length: 866 words
Byline: Lauran Neergaard, ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Almost as many prescription drugs were yanked off the U.S. market in the last 10 months as were banned in the entire previous decade, a spate that has critics questioning whether the Food and Drug Administration's safety nets are breaking down.
A senator has persuaded Congress' General Accounting Office to investigate whether the FDA - under political pressure to speed approvals - is doing enough to guard against risky medicines, or is passing drugs that once would have been held up for further study. One longtime FDA pharmacologist told the Associated Press that she had just left the agency in frustration with pressure to skim over safety concerns.
The message was that "one should be approving things, not questioning problems that arise, and . . . give the drug company the benefit of the doubt," said Elizabeth Barbehenn, who spent 13 years at FDA monitoring the safety of certain experimental drugs.
"The red flag is up," said consumer advocate Sidney Wolfe of Public Citizen, who noted that experts had questioned some of the five recently banned medicines before they were ever sold. "Whoever is responsible for creating the attitude at the FDA that they have to approve drugs even with serious safety concerns is starting to see the bloody results."
Dr. Michael Friedman, FDA's acting commissioner, vehemently denies that outside pressure influences drug-safety decisions.
"What drives the agency is not political or commercial or any other interest short of scientific," Friedman said. "It is not a responsible position . . . to suggest the agency would . . . do anything less than our very best to make public health decisions."
The FDA appropriately approved the later-banned drugs because the full scope of side effects did not show up at first, and the system worked by catching them as soon as they did appear, Friedman said.
Five drugs have been pulled off the market since September: the painkiller Duract, for causing liver failure, including four deaths and eight liver transplants; the blood pressure drug Posicor, after 400 injuries and 24 deaths when it interacted dangerously with other medications; the diet drugs fenfluramine and Redux, for damaging hearts; and the antihistamine Seldane, which interacted lethally with a long list of other drugs.
In the previous 10 years, the FDA had banned just six drugs.
The FDA performs a complex balancing act: getting the promising new drugs to desperately ill patients quickly, while at the same time hunting the often subtle clues that signal which drugs will cause dangerous side effects.
Drugs are approved based on studies in a few hundred to a few thousand carefully chosen patients. That means rare problems may not emerge until tens of thousands of patients, or sicker ones, take them.
Over the last three years, Congress intensely pressured the once-backlogged FDA to speed approvals. Critics even accused FDA of killing patients by delaying potentially lifesaving therapies.
Attempts to force a drastic speedup ultimately failed. Still, by charging new fees to drugmakers, FDA hired hundreds more reviewers and approved a record 92 unique new drugs in 1996 and 1997, up from 50 the previous two years.
Faster approval of lifesaving therapies is good, Wolfe said, but just 20 percent of FDA-approved products are medical breakthroughs.
Most instead are "me-too" drugs like the just-banned Duract and Posicor. Wolfe lists at least 18 similar painkillers and 30 blood-pressure alternatives, questioning why the two were approved last year. The FDA knew that Duract, for example, caused serious liver damage if taken for longer than 10 days.
And there's a separate problem: how to inform doctors of the side effects that come with every drug.
About two million Americans are hospitalized annually for side effects, and 100,000 die, Thomas J. Moore, a researcher at George Washington University, reported last spring.
The FDA has to upgrade safety warnings on more than 20 drugs every month.
Doctors, however, aren't required to report side effects to the FDA so it can warn the public, and many don't. The agency has only about 80 employees to monitor more than 3,000 prescription drugs, but is working to improve surveillance, Friedman said.
Nor can the FDA force doctors to heed warnings. Duract, the painkiller, had to be banned because doctors ignored FDA's warning not to prescribe it for longer than 10 days, Friedman said. "If these products were used as prescribed, many of them would still be on the market."
Sen. Edward Kennedy (D., Mass.) asked the GAO to quickly investigate how well the FDA handles drug safety and side effects. Republicans, too, are making inquiries, but agree with Friedman that the drug bans actually may mean the system is working by detecting trouble.
There's no easy answer, because every drug approved is ultimately a judgment call, Moore said. He wants Congress to establish a scientific panel that judges how the FDA handles drug controversies, much as the National Transportation Safety Board investigates plane crashes.
"How safe does a drug have to be? There is no simple answer," Moore said. "It is a question of getting the right balance, of learning from our mistakes, which is not happening now."
 Load-Date: October 24, 2002

 

End of Document


FIRM RECALLS GENERIC ASTHMA DRUG
Journal of Commerce

 Copyright 1994 The Journal of Commerce, Inc.
Section: CHEMICALS, Pg. 4B
Length: 176 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




A generic drug company is recalling millions of vials of a widely used asthma medication because the solution may be contaminated by microbial organisms.
 The company and the Food and Drug Administration said Wednesday the problem with Copley Pharmaceutical's albuterol sulfate inhalation solution could pose erious problems for people with weak immune systems.
That includes those with AIDS, cystic fibrosis or chronic obstructive lung disease and cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy or radiation.
Dr. Mark Jacobson, an AIDS specialist at the University of California at San Francisco, said people with impaired lung functions or immune systems would be at "substantial risk for developing life- threatening pneumonia" if they used contaminated medication.
Albuterol is a bronchodilator medication that Copley of Canton, Mass., sells under its own name and other private brand labels.
Copley sells the solution under its own name and these private brand labels: Aligen, Astra, Geneva, Goldline, Harber, Major, Moore, H.L. Moore, Qualitest, Rugby and Schein.
 Load-Date: December 12, 1996

 

End of Document


New drug's debut could set off diet craze redux
The Associated Press
February 12, 1998, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 749 words
Byline: BY JOHN HENDREN, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The diet drug Meridia hits pharmacy shelves this week as Knoll Pharmaceutical Co. launches what could become the next diet craze after the last one ended in a drug recall.
Meridia, the drug so anxiously awaited that dieters honored it with dozens of Internet sites before it was even approved, is expected to be in most drug stores by mid-March, Knoll said Thursday.
Meridia was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in November. It is the first prescription anti-obesity drug to hit the market since American Home Products Corp. recalled Redux and fenfluramine - half of the popular "fen-phen" diet cocktail. The FDA requested the recall after linking the drugs with potentially fatal heart valve damage.
With one in three Americans overweight, the potential market is enormous. Knoll, a unit of Germany's BASF AG, expects the drug's global sales to peak at $ 400 million to $ 500 million a year. Some analysts say it could far exceed that number.
Doctors at Nutri/System, a chain of diet clinics with 100,000 clients, will start writing prescriptions "as soon as it's in drugstores," said Brian Haveson, the company's president.
In a preemptive strike at critics, Knoll has begun a marketing pitch saying the drug is very different from the two drugs pulled from the market in August. The company says it will actively try to keep casual dieters from using it for cosmetic slimming.
"We are reaching out to doctors to partner with them to ensure that Meridia is used on the right patients, in the right way, for the right reasons," Knoll marketing head Steve Freeman said Thursday.
The drug may be the only way to get many frustrated dieters back in medical treatment programs.
Older diet drugs are still available, and Pfizer Inc. and Roche Laboratories are working on future drugs. But the August recall left seriously obese people with no satisfactory options, said Morgan Downey, executive director of the American Obesity Association.
Obesity experts hope to avoid the kind of surging popularity that spawned diet "pill mills" that pitched Redux and fen-phen as miracle weight-loss cures and then shut down after the recall. Some doctors were prescribing the drugs by telephone.
"As we saw with Redux, there's a tremendous pent-up market in weight loss," Downey said. "I think - I hope - the public has learned there is a danger in prescribing this to individuals who do not fit the criteria."
The criteria approved by the FDA is complex - a "body mass index" that declares patients obese if they are 30 percent overweight - but Neil Campbell fit it.
The Santa Monica, Calif., wine wholesaler usually avoids drugs, but he found his 6-foot-4 frame expanding as sales meetings increasingly mingled wine, cheese and fatty luncheon fare. After participating in a six-month research trial of Meridia, he went from 280 pounds to 240.
"It took the edge off the hunger," said Campbell, 48, now a management consultant. "Have you ever had the feeling where you've binged on a food, like ice cream or cookies, and started popping them like popcorn? It tended to eliminate that drive. I wouldn't feel I had to put everything into my mouth."
Many weight loss centers plan to stay drug free. Weight Watchers International medical director Dr. Myron Winick said clients can take the drug if they like, but the drug-free chain isn't going to offer doctors to prescribe it. Neither is Structure House in Durham, N.C.
"What happens is that (the drugs) get abused and people who only have a little bit of weight to lose demand them from physicians," said Structure House director Gerard J. Musante, a psychologist. "And physicians, not knowing what to do, prescribe them. That's a concern."
Like Redux and fen-phen, Meridia has raised safety concerns.
The FDA approved it over the objections of its own scientific advisers, who said potential side-effects make the drug too risky. It can cause increases in blood pressure and pulse rate that may endanger patients with hypertension or certain heart conditions, the FDA warned.
The agency called the drug "moderately effective." Patients who lost 5 to 10 percent of their body weight kept it off for at least a year.
Knoll has taken pains to distinguish the drug from Redux and fenfluramine by pointing out that it acts differently on the brain.
The recalled drugs fooled patients into feeling full by boosting production of a brain chemical called serotonin. Meridia, known chemically as sibutramine, slows the body's dissipation of the serotonin it naturally produces.
 
 Load-Date: February 12, 1998

 

End of Document


COMPANY NEWS; RECALL OF DRUG SENDS COPLEY SHARES DOWN 11%
The New York Times
September 15, 1994, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 1994 The New York Times Company
Distribution: Financial Desk 
Section: Section D; ; Section D;  Page 4;  Column 1;  Financial Desk ; Column 1; 
Length: 88 words
Byline: AP 
Body




Shares of Copley Pharmaceutical Inc. plunged 11 percent yesterday after the fast-growing generic drug maker announced its second recall this year. Copley said it was recalling an over-the-counter antihistamine drug called Brompheril because of worries about whether the pills were properly coated. The company said the safety or effectiveness of Brompheril was not in question, but it acknowledged receiving a Federal grand jury subpoena requesting documents about the drug. The company's stock fell $3.50, to $27, in Nasdaq trading.
 Load-Date: September 15, 1994

 

End of Document


More Setbacks for Bolar
The New York Times
July 27, 1990, Friday, Late Edition - Final

 Copyright 1990 The New York Times Company
Section: Section D; Page 15, Column 5; Financial Desk
Length: 220 words
Byline: Reuters
Dateline: COPIAGUE, L.I., July 26
Body




Under pressure because of a generic-drug scandal, the Bolar Pharmaceutical Company said on Wednesday that it would discontinue making 14 drugs and recall 4 other drugs.
Bolar, once a leading manufacturer of low-priced generic drugs, has virtually halted manufacturing since Federal regulators charged that the company had acted fraudulently in gaining Federal approval for some of its most profitable products.
The company's two top executives resigned in February, one day before securities regulators sued Bolar. The company's stock, which last year traded for $32.25, now lingers around $5 a share.
Bolar said it recalled the four drugs Wednesday after determining that its manufacturing processes or test results did not meet the standards of the Food and Drug Administration. The drugs account for about 5 percent of the company's sales and 16 percent of pretax income, Bolar said.
The other 14 drugs were discontinued for economic reasons, Bolar said. The discontinued drugs made up about 6 percent of 1989 net sales and 16 percent of pretax income, it said.
Bolar also said it had settled on six months' severance pay for its former president, Robert Shulman, and former executive vice president, Jack Rivers, who resigned in February. Earlier the company said it would countinue paying the two executives for two years.

 

End of Document


RECALL OF 2 DIET DRUGS TO HIT WYETH-AYERST / IT FACES MILLIONS IN LOST SALES AND LITIGATION. BUT ANALYSTS DOWNPLAY THE EFFECTS ON THE ST. DAVIDS COMPANY AND ITS CORPORATE PARENT.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
SEPTEMBER 16, 1997 Tuesday SF EDITION

 Copyright 1997 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved
 
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. C01
Length: 769 words
Byline: Andrea Gerlin, INQUIRER STAFF WRITER
Body




Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories' removal of its two popular diet drugs from the market won't decimate its business, but the move will dent its financial results and may complicate its legal liability.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration yesterday recommended that the pharmaceutical giant stop selling Pondimin and Redux after it discovered new evidence that the drugs seriously damage patients' hearts. The company, based in St. Davids, announced that it would recall the products, notify doctors, and buy back remaining inventory.
Redux is known chemically as dexfenfluramine. Pondimin, known as fenfluramine, is half of the popular diet-drug combination called fen-phen. The other half, phentermine, is not affected by the withdrawal.
Together, Redux and Pondimin accounted for three-fourths of the $500 million annual prescription diet-drug market. As reports emerged this summer suggesting the drugs caused heart-valve problems in some patients, sales began to fall.
According to IMS America, a pharmaceutical research firm in Plymouth Meeting, 4.3 million prescriptions were written for Redux and 7.2 million for Pondimin for the 12 months that ended in July. Retail sales of Redux were $206 million, a 39 percent share of the total market, and retail sales of Pondimin were $188 million, or 36 percent.
After the New England Journal of Medicine recommended in a July editorial that patients stop taking the fen-phen combination, monthly sales of Redux and Pondimin plummeted 34 percent and 46 percent, respectively, from June levels.
More dramatic than that loss is Redux's unfulfilled promise.
When it was launched in June 1996, the drug was touted as a huge future source of revenue for Wyeth-Ayerst. "If the side effects hadn't shown up, it would have been $1 billion in sales," said analyst Hemant K. Shah of HKS & Co. in New York.
Wyeth-Ayerst's parent, American Home Products Corp., said it expected to earn 2 cents a share less in the 1997 third and fourth quarters and 10 cents a share less in 1998. In addition, the Madison, N.J., company said it would take an after-tax charge of $200 million to $300 million, or 20 cents to 30 cents a share, to cover the cost of withdrawing the products.
Analysts downplayed the financial effects, noting that American Home is large, has a diverse product line, and should easily recover.
The company earned nearly $1.9 billion, or $2.96 a share, on revenues of $14.1 billion in 1996. A spokesman for Wyeth-Ayerst said the St. Davids unit accounted for $7.9 billion of American Home's 1996 revenues.
Analysts surveyed yesterday said they were scaling back their earnings estimates for American Home. They had expected the company to earn $3.38 a share this year and $3.83 a share next year, according to First Call, a Chicago-based investment research network.
Beyond the immediate effects on American Home's performance, analysts wondered about the potential liability the company will face in court. Already, a Wyeth-Ayerst spokeswoman said, the company faces numerous lawsuits around the country, including some seeking class-action status.
Several analysts speculated that Wyeth-Ayerst's vulnerability may be reduced because it licensed Redux from Interneuron Pharmaceuticals in Lexington, Mass., rather than manufacturing the drug, and wasn't aggressively promoting Pondimin. In addition, they noted that the most serious result of the fen-phen combination, primary pulmonary hypertension, was noted on warning labels.
Still, some predicted a thicket of costly litigation ahead. One analyst estimated that liability costs could reach as high as $200 million. Other analysts said it was too soon to predict those costs.
"On an ongoing basis, that's really the only wild card left," said Alex Zisson, an analyst at Hambrecht & Quist in New York.
A Wyeth-Ayerst spokesman said the company had insurance, but he declined to elaborate on the extent of the coverage.
In New York Stock Exchange trading, shares of American Home fell 4.8 percent to close at $73.25. Interneuron took a bigger hit, diving 9.1 percent to close at $18.56 in Nasdaq Stock Market trading.
As of Friday, analysts had recommended American Home's stock as a buy or hold, according to First Call, ratings that remained virtually unchanged yesterday.
Several analysts said they were considering upgrading their recommendations on the stock, calling it a "bargain."
"The stock is still one of the best values in the entire blue-ribbon drug industry," said analyst David Saks of Gruntal & Co. in New York. "The concerns over the diet drugs have been amply reflected in the stock price. This is more a time to step up."
 Graphic



 
CHART
 Load-Date: October 18, 2002

 

End of Document


TWO DIET DRUGS TAKEN OFF SHELF; REDUX, 'FEN-PHEN' CAUSE HEART VALVE LEAKAGE, FDA SAYS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
September 16, 1997, Tuesday,
SOONER EDITION

 Copyright 1997 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE,
Length: 551 words
Byline: MAGGIE FOX, REUTERS NEWS SERVICE
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Two of America's most popular diet drugs were recalled yesterday because of new research showing they can cause dangerous damage to the heart.
One of the recalled drugs, fenfluramine, is used with another drug, phentermine, to make the diet cocktail ''fen-phen,'' a combination that several studies have shown to be the source of a valve defect of the heart.
The drugs are supposed to be used only by people who are clinically obese and never in combination, but the ''fen-phen'' diet fad has spread rapidly in the last few years.
The FDA said it was not requesting the withdrawal of phentermine.
The other recalled drug, dexfenfluramine, is sold under the name Redux. The Food and Drug Administration said people should stop taking the drugs.
It said it had collected findings from doctors who used echocardiograms to listen to the hearts of people using the drugs. The instruments measure the function of heart valves, which let the blood in and out of the heart.
''These findings indicate that approximately 30 percent of patients who were evaluated had abnormal echocardiograms, even though they had no symptoms. This is a much higher than expected percentage of abnormal test results,'' it said.
''These findings call for prompt action,'' said Michael Friedman, lead deputy commissioner of the FDA.
The American Obesity Association says 300,000 Americans die each year of obesity-related complications. It says 58 million Americans are obese - and the epidemic of obesity is also sweeping industrialized nations like Britain and Japan.
Interneuron Pharmaceuticals, which makes Redux, and marketing partner Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories, a subsidiary of American Home Products Co, which also markets fenfluramine under the name Pondimin, both agreed to withdraw the drugs.
''We have no plans to reintroduce either Redux or fenfluramine,'' Wyeth-Ayerst spokesman Doug Petkus told Reuters.
''Both Redux and fenfluramine are dead, there's no bringing them back,'' added Edmund Debler, pharmaceuticals analyst at Mehta and Isaly.
Janet Woodcock, director of the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, said the effects of the recalled drugs were subtle but important.
''Valves are a lot like valves in a pump or a car. The flow is supposed to go forward and not backward. If your valves are affected there can be backward leakage,'' she said.
''It means the heart has to pump harder because it is less efficient. Small amounts of this won't cause symptoms, maybe for a very long time.''
Woodcock said the drugs were most widely used in the fen-phen combination, with an estimated 1 million Americans taking it until the warnings started in July. She said smaller numbers took fenfluramine, dexfenfluramine or phentermine alone.
In July researchers at the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota said they found 24 cases of the heart disease among women taking the combination. Since then, the FDA said, 58 more cases were reported and a woman died after taking fen-phen for 23 days.
FDA spokesman Larry Bachorik said doctors had been keeping an eye on patients since then and reporting to the FDA. Tests on 291 patients who had no symptoms showed their heart valves could be malfunctioning.
Woodcock said no drug was completely safe.  ''Any drug is not going to be completely safe. There is just no free ride with drug therapy,'' she said.
 Graphic



 
INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC, INFORMATIONAL GRAPHIC: The Human Body, The Heart; IMS America; Amy; Kranz, Carl Fox/Associated Press: (Diet drugs recalled)
 Load-Date: September 16, 1997

 

End of Document


FDA Announces Drug Recall
The Associated Press
October 2, 1990, Tuesday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1990 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Washington Dateline
Length: 169 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Two lots of a prescription antihistamine are being recalled because the packages may contain a blood pressure medication, the Food and Drug Administration said today.
The antihistamine is Bioline brand hydroxyzine pamoate in 50 milligram capsules.
The blood pressure medication, 2 mg clonidine hydrochloride, comes in scored, peach-colored tablets, with a "dp" logo above the scoreline and "02" below the line.
If a consumer finds that a bottle that is supposed to contain the Bioline capsules instead contains the tablets, they should return it to the pharmacy where they got it, the FDA advised.
Someone who takes the blood pressure drug in the amounts directed for the antihistamine could become dizzy and fall, the agency said.
Both drugs are made by Duramed Pharmaceuticals of Cincinnati, Ohio. Labels are supplied by the distributor, Bioline Laboratries of Ft. Lauderdale, Fla.
Bioline is asking pharmacists to examine lots 91009 and 91240.
About 237 bottles from these lots were distributed nationally, the FDA said.

 

End of Document


New Diet Drug Coming Next week BY JOHN HENDREN  AP Business Writer 
Associated Press Online
February 12, 1998; Thursday 15:40 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Financial pages
Length: 776 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The diet drug Meridia hits pharmacy shelves this week as Knoll Pharmaceutical Co. launches what could become the next diet craze after the last one ended in a drug recall.
Meridia, the drug so anxiously awaited that dieters honored it with dozens of Internet sites before it was even approved, is expected to be in most drug stores by mid-March, Knoll said Thursday.
Meridia was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in November. It is the first prescription anti-obesity drug to hit the market since American Home Products Corp. recalled Redux and fenfluramine half of the popular ''fen-phen'' diet cocktail. The FDA requested the recall after linking the drugs with potentially fatal heart valve damage.
With one in three Americans overweight, the potential market is enormous. Knoll, a unit of Germany's BASF AG, expects the drug's global sales to peak at $400 million to $500 million a year. Some analysts say it could far exceed that number.
Doctors at Nutri/System, a chain of diet clinics with 100,000 clients, will start writing prescriptions ''as soon as it's in drugstores,'' said Brian Haveson, the company's president.
In a preemptive strike at critics, Knoll has begun a marketing pitch saying the drug is very different from the two drugs pulled from the market in August. The company says it will actively try to keep casual dieters from using it for cosmetic slimming.
''We are reaching out to doctors to partner with them to ensure that Meridia is used on the right patients, in the right way, for the right reasons,'' Knoll marketing head Steve Freeman said Thursday.
The drug may be the only way to get many frustrated dieters back in medical treatment programs.
Older diet drugs are still available, and Pfizer Inc. and Roche Laboratories are working on future drugs. But the August recall left seriously obese people with no satisfactory options, said Morgan Downey, executive director of the American Obesity Association.
Obesity experts hope to avoid the kind of surging popularity that spawned diet ''pill mills'' that pitched Redux and fen-phen as miracle weight-loss cures and then shut down after the recall. Some doctors were prescribing the drugs by telephone.
''As we saw with Redux, there's a tremendous pent-up market in weight loss,'' Downey said. ''I think I hope the public has learned there is a danger in prescribing this to individuals who do not fit the criteria.''
The criteria approved by the FDA is complex a ''body mass index'' that declares patients obese if they are 30 percent overweight but Neil Campbell fit it.
The Santa Monica, Calif., wine wholesaler usually avoids drugs, but he found his 6-foot-4 frame expanding as sales meetings increasingly mingled wine, cheese and fatty luncheon fare. After participating in a six-month research trial of Meridia, he went from 280 pounds to 240.
''It took the edge off the hunger,'' said Campbell, 48, now a management consultant. ''Have you ever had the feeling where you've binged on a food, like ice cream or cookies, and started popping them like popcorn? It tended to eliminate that drive. I wouldn't feel I had to put everything into my mouth.''
Many weight loss centers plan to stay drug free. Weight Watchers International medical director Dr. Myron Winick said clients can take the drug if they like, but the drug-free chain isn't going to offer doctors to prescribe it. Neither is Structure House in Durham, N.C.
''What happens is that (the drugs) get abused and people who only have a little bit of weight to lose demand them from physicians,'' said Structure House director Gerard J. Musante, a psychologist. ''And physicians, not knowing what to do, prescribe them. That's a concern.''
Like Redux and fen-phen, Meridia has raised safety concerns.
The FDA approved it over the objections of its own scientific advisers, who said potential side-effects make the drug too risky. It can cause increases in blood pressure and pulse rate that may endanger patients with hypertension or certain heart conditions, the FDA warned.
The agency called the drug ''moderately effective.'' Patients who lost 5 to 10 percent of their body weight kept it off for at least a year.
Knoll has taken pains to distinguish the drug from Redux and fenfluramine by pointing out that it acts differently on the brain.
The recalled drugs fooled patients into feeling full by boosting production of a brain chemical called serotonin. Meridia, known chemically as sibutramine, slows the body's dissipation of the serotonin it naturally produces.
   (PROFILE
   (CO:American Home Products; TS:AHP; IG:DRG;)
   (CO:Pfizer Inc; TS:PFE; IG:DRG;)
   (CAT:Business;)
   (CAT:Medical;)
   (CAT:Consumer;)
   )
 Load-Date: February 12, 1998

 

End of Document


New drug's debut could set off diet craze redux
The Associated Press
February 12, 1998, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 767 words
Byline: BY JOHN HENDREN, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The diet drug Meridia hits pharmacy shelves this week as Knoll Pharmaceutical Co. launches what could become the next diet craze after the last one ended in a drug recall.
Meridia, the drug so anxiously awaited that dieters honored it with dozens of Internet sites before it was even approved, is expected to be in most drug stores by mid-March, Knoll said Thursday.
Meridia was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in November. It is the first prescription anti-obesity drug to hit the market since American Home Products Corp. recalled Redux and fenfluramine - half of the popular "fen-phen" diet cocktail. The FDA requested the recall after linking the drugs with potentially fatal heart valve damage.
With one in three Americans overweight, the potential market is enormous. Knoll, a unit of Germany's BASF AG, expects the drug's global sales to peak at $ 400 million to $ 500 million a year. Some analysts say it could far exceed that number.
Doctors at Nutri/System, a chain of diet clinics with 100,000 clients, will start writing prescriptions "as soon as it's in drugstores," said Brian Haveson, the company's president.
In a preemptive strike at critics, Knoll has begun a marketing pitch saying the drug is very different from the two drugs pulled from the market in August. The company says it will actively try to keep casual dieters from using it for cosmetic slimming.
"We are reaching out to doctors to partner with them to ensure that Meridia is used on the right patients, in the right way, for the right reasons," Knoll marketing head Steve Freeman said Thursday.
The drug may be the only way to get many frustrated dieters back in medical treatment programs.
Older diet drugs are still available, and Pfizer Inc. and Roche Laboratories are working on future drugs. But the August recall left seriously obese people with no satisfactory options, said Morgan Downey, executive director of the American Obesity Association.
Obesity experts hope to avoid the kind of surging popularity that spawned diet "pill mills" that pitched Redux and fen-phen as miracle weight-loss cures and then shut down after the recall. Some doctors were prescribing the drugs by telephone.
"As we saw with Redux, there's a tremendous pent-up market in weight loss," Downey said. "I think - I hope - the public has learned there is a danger in prescribing this to individuals who do not fit the criteria."
The criteria approved by the FDA is complex - a "body mass index" that declares most patients obese if they reach a level of 30 or higher on the index.
For instance, Neil Campbell was considered overweight with a BMI of 34, having a weight of 280 pounds and height of 6-foot-4. The Santa Monica, Calif., wine wholesaler usually avoids drugs, but he found he was gaining weight as sales meetings increasingly mingled wine, cheese and fatty luncheon fare. After participating in a six-month research trial of Meridia, he dropped to 240 pounds.
"It took the edge off the hunger," said Campbell, 48, now a management consultant. "Have you ever had the feeling where you've binged on a food, like ice cream or cookies, and started popping them like popcorn? It tended to eliminate that drive. I wouldn't feel I had to put everything into my mouth."
Many weight loss centers plan to stay drug free. Weight Watchers International medical director Dr. Myron Winick said clients can take the drug if they like, but the drug-free chain isn't going to offer doctors to prescribe it. Neither is Structure House in Durham, N.C.
"What happens is that (the drugs) get abused and people who only have a little bit of weight to lose demand them from physicians," said Structure House director Gerard J. Musante, a psychologist. "And physicians, not knowing what to do, prescribe them. That's a concern."
Like Redux and fen-phen, Meridia has raised safety concerns.
The FDA approved it over the objections of its own scientific advisers, who said potential side-effects make the drug too risky. It can cause increases in blood pressure and pulse rate that may endanger patients with hypertension or certain heart conditions, the FDA warned.
The agency called the drug "moderately effective." Patients who lost 5 to 10 percent of their body weight kept it off for at least a year.
Knoll has taken pains to distinguish the drug from Redux and fenfluramine by pointing out that it acts differently on the brain.
The recalled drugs fooled patients into feeling full by boosting production of a brain chemical called serotonin. Meridia, known chemically as sibutramine, slows the body's dissipation of the serotonin it naturally produces.
 
 Load-Date: February 13, 1998

 

End of Document


DEATHS SPUR DRUG RECALL
 Philadelphia Daily News
JUNE 23, 1998 Tuesday LATE SPORTS EDITION

 Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved
 
Section: FEATURES YO!; Pg. 27
Length: 185 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




The potent painkiller Duract was recalled by the manufacturer yesterday, after four people who had been taking it died and eight others required liver transplants.
All but one of the patients had been using Duract for longer than the government-recommended maximum of 10 days, Wyeth-Ayerst said.
The person who used it for a shorter time already had significant liver disease.
"While we continue to believe that Duract is safe and effective when used for 10 days or less, rare but serious adverse events have been associated with Duract when used for longer periods," Dr. Philip de Vane, head of clinical affairs for Wyeth-Ayerst's parent, American Home Products Corp., said in a statement.
The company concluded that keeping the product on the market with a stronger warning against using it for more than 10 days "would not be feasible or effective," de Vane said.
Doctors have written 2.5 million prescriptions for Duract since it hit the market in July 1997 as an alternative to narcotics for short-term pain relief after surgery and for other acute pain.
Duract is not intended for arthritis or other chronic pain.
 Notes



ESSENTIALS
 Load-Date: October 17, 2002

 

End of Document


Biocraft Ordered to Stop Making Five Products
The Associated Press
July 29, 1994, Friday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic News
Length: 375 words
Dateline: NEWARK, N.J.
Body




One of the nation's largest manufacturers of generic drugs, Biocraft Laboratories Inc., has agreed to recall batches of nine drugs and immediately stop making and selling five of them.
In the court-approved settlement, the company will stop making the drugs - widely used antibiotics, heart medication, and others - until an outside expert certifies they are being manufactured in accordance with U.S. Food and Drug Administration guidelines.
Biocraft also must have an expert certify all its remaining drugs, following a schedule set forth in the consent decree. If Biocraft does not meet the schedule, or if the FDA rejects any of the certifications, it will have to stop making the drug in question, the U.S. Justice Department said.
The Justice Department had accused Biocraft of violating federal standards for testing, record-keeping, manufacturing and quality control.
Harold Snyder, Biocraft's president and chief executive officer, said today that the recall involves only a minute portion of the nine drugs and that the products - including the five drugs the company has stopped making and selling - are all safe.
"We voluntarily recalled these drugs and stopped making others because there are some outstanding regulatory matters we had to resolve," Snyder said. "Rather than resolve them with litigation, we thought it better to resolve them amicably."
Biocraft shares jumped $ 2.50 to $ 14.62 on the New York Stock Exchange after the settlement was revealed Thursday. The stock was down 75 cents to $ 13.87 in early trading today.
The shares had been falling steadily since early June's peak of $ 17.75 on poor earnings and uncertainty over the government claims.
The drug lots being recalled include commonly prescribed antibiotics: liquid amoxicillin for humans and for animals, amoxicillin chewable tablets, cephalexin and liquid ampicillin.
Also to be recalled are lots of disopyramide capsules, a heart medication for angina and rhythm irregularities; liquid nystatin, an anti-fungal for yeast infections; sulfamethoxazole with trimethoprim, another anti-arrhythmic drug, and the diuretic amiloride.
Biocraft must halt production of these drugs: liquid amoxicillin for humans and for animals, liquid ampicillin, amiloride and liquid nystatin.
 Load-Date: July 29, 1994

 

End of Document


Painkiller Duract recalled after transplants, 4 deaths
USA TODAY
June 23, 1998, Tuesday,
FINAL EDITION

 Copyright 1998 Gannett Company, Inc.
Section: NEWS;
Length: 298 words
Byline: Robert Davis
Body




The maker of the popular new painkiller Duract pulled it from
the market after four people died and eight more needed liver
transplants, the Food and Drug Administration announced Monday.
It is the fifth drug recalled in nine months, and the third withdrawn
by Wyeth-Ayerst.
Duract had been prescribed 2.5 million times since it was approved
nearly a year ago. It was expected to earn $ 100 million this year
for Wyeth-Ayerst.
The drug was prescribed for non-narcotic pain relief after surgery.
Patients said Duract, a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory analgesic,
like ibuprofen and other over-the-counter pain killers, eased
pain as effectively as some opiates.
But some people who used Duract for more than 10 days, against
the advice of drug makers and the FDA, suffered severe liver damage.
In September, Wyeth-Ayerst recalled the diet drugs Pondimin and
Redux after those drugs were linked to heart valve problems. In
February, the allergy drug Seldane, made by Hoechst Marion Roussel,
was recalled following deadly drug interactions.
Earlier this month, the drug Posicor, made by Roche Laboratories
to treat high blood pressure and chest pain, was recalled because
of drug interactions.
"This is the worst record we've ever had," says Thomas Moore
of George Washington University Medical Center. "The issue here
is how fast the FDA is approving drugs."
But the FDA says the recalls show its safety system works. "We're
picking up the reports of adverse events and taking action very
fast," says the FDA's Susan Cruzan.
Jeff Trewhitt, spokesman for the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers
of America, says the recalls are a reminder that the drug approval
system "is not perfectly safe'' because some problems can only
be found when drugs are taken by millions. "People need to know
that there are potential risks."
 Load-Date: June 23, 1998

 

End of Document


Company: Law Favors Diet Drug Maker
Associated Press Online
September 29, 1997; Monday 19:01 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Financial pages
Length: 693 words
Byline: JOHN HENDREN 
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




American Home Products executives said Monday the recall of two diet drugs has prompted 21 class action lawsuits from dieters, but they also said the law is on the drug maker's side.
The Madison, N.J.-based consumer products giant did receive 11 ''adverse drug reports'' on the diet drugs Redux and Pondimin, out of 6 million users, before a Mayo Clinic report linked the drugs to heart problems in May. But the reports from patients were ''very isolated and very scattered,'' company general counsel Louis L. Hoynes Jr. told analysts at a meeting in New York.
The company said it should have little to fear from the class-action suits and dozens more filed by individuals because the company had no duty to warn patients of side-effects of which it knew nothing.
''The law does not impose a duty to warn about an unknown and inintended risk,'' Hoynes said. ''We will proceed knowing that we have always acted responsibly and in a timely manner.''
The company recalled the drugs earlier this month at the request of the Food and Drug Administration, forcing thousands of dieters nationwide to alter their weight-loss regimens.
Analysts' say the company's legal exposure is probably limited. Most of the claims come from those who took Pondimin, generically called fenfluramine, with the drug phentermine, a combination known as ''fen-phen'' that was neither approved by the FDA nor promoted by the company, the company said.
Pondimin, generically known as fenfluramine, had been on the market since 1973 in the United States. Redux, or dexfenfluramine, was used in Europe for 10 years, although it was only approved in the United States in mid-1996.
The company pointed out that the Mayo study did not show that the drugs caused heart damage, only that a statistical link may exist.
Several analysts have urged investors to buy the stock. The company has already earned half of the $400 million analysts at Salomon Brothers had expected the company's Wyeth-Ayerst division to earn on the obesity drugs this year.
But even if the company is found to be responsible, its penalty is unlikely to go much beyond the $2.8 billion settlement it reached for patients who used the Dalkon Shield birth control device, said Mariola Haggar, an analyst at Deutsche Morgan Grenfell. The company could raise that amount by using its estimated $1 billion in product liability insurance, $1 billion in cash reserves, $2 billion it could garner by selling its medical devices division, she said.
The company has no further plans to market an obesity drug, and sent one candidate back into early development after it failed to show satisfactory results, Wyeth-Ayerst President Robert I. Levy said.
And Unlike Servier, which markets Redux in Europe, American Home Products does not foresee putting Redux and Pondimin back on the market even if it is cleared of the suspected side-effects in future tests said John R. Stafford, AHP's chairman, president and chief executive officer.
''Right now we have no plans and are not giving any consideration to remarketing them,'' he said.
American Home estimates the drug recall will cost it $300 million before taxes. Without that, earnings would have grown 10 percent in the third quarter and 12 to 13 percent for the year. The recall is expected to cost 10 cents a share for the year, lowering analysts 1997 earnings estimates to about $3.34.
The gathered analysts to preview its upcoming drug lines. Among the products that drew enthusiasm was Fiblast, a drug in early-stage development to treat stroke victims. The company introduced TSE-424, its own entry into a competitive race among drug makers to develop a product to replace Premarin, the Wyeth-Ayerst estrogen drug that, at $1 billion, is the best-selling drug in the nation. Unlike Eli Lilly & Co.'s raloxifene, which could receive FDA approval in November, TSE-424 is in early tests.
Nevertheless, many analysts left little concerned over the future cost of the diet drug recall.
''The pipeline for this company now appears better than it has
or 15 or 20 years,'' Ms. Haggar said.
   (PROFILE
   (CO:American Home Products; TS:AHP; IG:DRG;)
   (CAT:Business;)
   (CAT:Medical;)
   (CAT:Consumer;)
   )
 Load-Date: September 29, 1997

 

End of Document


Diet drug goes on sale this week
Lincoln Journal Star (Nebraska)
February 13, 1998 Friday
City Edition

 Copyright 1998 Lincoln Journal Star, All Rights Reserved
Section: A; Pg. 2
Length: 307 words
Byline: JOHN HENDREN The Associated Press
Body




NEW YORK -- Weight-conscious Ameri- cans who have been struggling since the last diet craze ended in a drug recall got good news Thursday: The anti-obesity drug Meridia hits pharmacy shelves this week.  Its mak- er, Knoll Pharma- ceutical Co., already is trying to portray the drug as very different from the two that were pulled from the market in August.  The company says it will try to keep ca- sual dieters from using it for cosmetic slim- ming. 
 "We are reaching out to doctors to part- ner with them to ensure that Meridia is used on the right patients, in the right way, for the right reasons," Knoll marketing head Steve Freeman said Thursday.  Meridia, so anxiously awaited that it was honored with dozens of Internet sites before it was even approved by the Food and Drug Administration in November, is expected to be in most drugstores by mid-March.  It's the first prescription anti-obesity drug to hit the market since American Home Products Corp. recalled Redux and fenfluramine -- half of the popular "fen- phen" diet combination. The FDA requested the recall after the drugs were linked to po- tentially fatal heart valve damage. With one in three Americans overweight, the potential market is enormous. Knoll, a unit of Germany's BASF AG, expects the drug's global sales to peak at $400 million to $500 million a year. Some analysts say it could do far better than that.  Doctors at Nutri/System, a chain of diet clinics with 100,000 clients, will start writing prescriptions as soon as it's in drugstores, said Brian Haveson, the company's presi- dent.  Other, older diet drugs are still available, and Pfizer Inc. and Roche Laboratories are working on future drugs. But the August re- call left seriously obese people with no satis- factory options, said Morgan Downey, executive director of the American Obesity Association.
 Load-Date: November 2, 2006

 

End of Document


CONGRESS TARGETING DATE-RAPE DRUG USE; TEEN RECALLS TRAGEDY AS WARNING TO OTHERS
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
March 12, 1999, Friday,
TWO STAR EDITION

 Copyright 1999 The Richmond Times Dispatch
Section: GENERAL,
Length: 599 words
Byline: Peter Hardin; Times-Dispatch; Washington Correspondent
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




When she was raped three years ago, Candace Pruett not only was assaulted, she was drugged.
The Dumfries teen-ager drank from a soda laced with a drug that knocked her unconscious for several hours. Afterward, she didn't remember being raped, or her attacker, but a medical exam found evidence of sexual assault.
"The drug I was given unfortunately had robbed me of my memories of what happened that night," the tall high school senior, now 18, emotionally told Congress yesterday.
"What my attacker did to me also robbed me of my childhood," she added.
With her mother seated beside her before an investigations panel of the House Commerce Committee, Pruett offered her tragedy as a warning for others.
"I hope that by appearing today, I can let other people know about the danger that exists because of the sick people who use these drugs to assault unsuspecting victims," she testified.
Pruett was a star witness for lawmakers seeking a federal crackdown on the growing abuse of certain "date-rape drugs" used for getting a quick and potent high and, in some cases, for raping unknowing victims.
She delivered the riveting personal story that set the stage for expert witnesses to condemn a surge in the use of such drugs, especially a lethal one called gamma hydroxy-butyrate, or GHB, and to urge their classification as federally controlled substances.
A tough-talking retired narcotics detective from Los Angeles, Trinka D. Porrata, held up an eye dropper. She likened it to a deadly weapon.
"This is all a rapist needs to use GHB," Porrata warned.
Available at bars, night clubs and all-night dance parties called "raves," GHB is variously called "liquid ecstasy," "Georgia Home Boy" and "Scoop."
"You have no clue how big this problem is," Porrata said. "For every rape victim out there, there's hundreds of overdoses caused by voluntary ingestion," and "for every death that occurs, there's more that weren't caught by coroners."
Recipes for making GHB at home and kits to do so are available on the Internet, lawmakers were told.
"The truth is, GHB is dangerous, addictive and harder than heroin to shake," Porrata testified. She called its use "exploding around the world."
Twenty states have imposed controls on GHB, which a Drug Enforcement Administration official said can knock someone into unconsciousness in 15 minutes and a coma in a half-hour.
Produced illegally in clandestine labs, GHB has been detected by medical examiners in 32 corpses since 1995, the DEA official said, and emergency room episodes involving GHB skyrocketed from 54 in 1994 to 764 in 1997.
The DEA knows of sexual-assault cases involving 22 victims under the influence of GHB since 1996. But it's impossible to know how often the drug was used for a sexual assault, the official cautioned. GHB is quickly passed from a victim's body.
An official with the federal Food and Drug Administration said that agency is completing a review of GHB, which is being studied for commercial development in this country, especially for treatment of narcolepsy.
One lawmaker, Democratic Rep. Sheila Jackson-Lee of Texas, is pushing a bill to classify GHB in the same category of dangerous drugs as heroin.
She told of a 17-year-old Texas girl, a high school volleyball player, who died during the night after someone poured GHB into her soft drink at a teen-age club.
"These youngsters have this drug the night before, and they're gone the next morning," Lee lamented.
Commerce Committee Chairman Thomas J. Bliley Jr., R-7th, afterward called for hearings in the appropriate subcommittee to consider measures to clamp down on date-rape drugs.
 Load-Date: March 13, 1999

 

End of Document


Allergy drug recalled
UK NEWS DIGEST:
Financial Times (London,England)
April 5, 1997, Saturday
LONDON EDITION 3

 Copyright 1997 The Financial Times Limited
Section: NEWS: UK;; Digests
Length: 126 words
Body




* MEDICINE
Allergy drug recalled
A batch of 70,000 bottles of an anti-allergy drug used by adults and children were recalled by the makers tonight because the instructions suggested too high a dosage.
The single batch of Phenergan Elixir 100 millilitre bottles has a printing error on patient information said Dr Martin Ford, medical director of Franco-American pharmaceutical firm Rhone-Poulenc Rorer.
The higher-than-recommended dosage could lead to "excitation, hallucinations and incoordination of movement" as well as drowsiness, he said.
Customers have been urged to check the batch number printed on the top flap of the carton and the side of the bottle label. Those with the number LOT 7B357 should be returned to the pharmacist.
 Load-Date: April 7, 1997

 

End of Document


Clotting drug being recalled
LANCASTER NEW ERA (LANCASTER, PA.)
September 25, 1997, Thursday

 Copyright 1997 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: NEWS,
Length: 104 words
Body




WASHINGTON (AP) - A blood-clotting drug is being recalled because of contamination by an organism that could cause life-threatening infection in people with weakened immune systems.
AP#XA0473.PMW#
Two lots of Amicar Syrup 25% were found during routine testing to contain the organism, Candida parapsilosis, said Immunex Corp., the Seattle-based maker of the drug said Wednesday.
Immunex, which initiated the recall with the Food and Drug Administration, said "the risk of infection is remote."
However, the company said patients should return any Amicar Syrup 25% received on or after June 1 to the pharmacy where it was purchased.
 Load-Date: October 14, 1999

 

End of Document


New Diet Drug Hitting Market
Associated Press Online
February 13, 1998; Friday 05:32 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic, non-Washington, general news item
Length: 568 words
Byline: JOHN HENDREN 
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Dieters still smarting from the recall of the popular ''fen-phen'' drugs last year, take heart a new anti-obesity drug will appear in stores this week.
Hopes are high that Meridia, the new product from Knoll Pharmaceutical Co., will dominate the market for diet drugs. With one in three Americans overweight, the potential market is enormous.
Meridia is the first prescription anti-obesity drug to hit the market since American Home Products Corp. recalled Redux and fenfluramine half of the popular ''fen-phen'' diet cocktail. Federal regulators requested the recall after linking the drugs with potentially fatal heart valve damage.
Knoll said it expected the drug's global sales to peak at $400 million to $500 million a year. Some analysts say it could far exceed that number, once it hits most stores by mid-March.
Doctors at Nutri/System, a chain of diet clinics with 100,000 clients, will start writing prescriptions ''as soon as it's in drugstores,'' said Brian Haveson, the company's president.
Knoll has begun a marketing pitch saying the drug is very different from the drugs pulled from the market in August. The company says it will actively try to keep casual dieters from using it for cosmetic slimming.
''We are reaching out to doctors to partner with them to ensure that Meridia is used on the right patients, in the right way, for the right reasons,'' Knoll marketing head Steve Freeman said Thursday.
Older diet drugs are still available and Pfizer Inc. and Roche Laboratories are working on future drugs. But the August recall left seriously obese people with no satisfactory options, said Morgan Downey, executive director of the American Obesity Association.
The recalled drugs fooled patients into feeling full by boosting production of a brain chemical called serotonin. Meridia, known chemically as sibutramine, slows the body's dissipation of serotonin.
Obesity experts hope to avoid the kind of surging popularity that spawned diet ''pill mills'' that pitched Redux and fen-phen as miracle weight-loss cures and then shut down after the recall. Some doctors were prescribing the drugs by telephone.
''As we saw with Redux, there's a tremendous pent-up market in weight loss,'' Downey said. ''I think I hope the public has learned there is a danger in prescribing this to individuals who do not fit the criteria.''
The criteria approved by the Food and Drug Administration is complex, declaring most patients as obese if they reach a level of 30 or higher on a ''mass body index.''
That fit Neil Campbell, a 48-year-old management consultant from Santa Monica, Calif., who had a BMI of 34. After taking part in a six-month research trial of Meridia, his 6-foot-4 frame went from 280 pounds to 240.
''It took the edge off the hunger,'' Campbell said. ''I wouldn't feel I had to put everything into my mouth.''
The FDA approved Meridia in November over the objections of its own scientific advisers, who said potential side effects make the drug too risky. It can cause increases in blood pressure and pulse rate that may endanger patients with hypertension or certain heart conditions, the FDA warned.
The agency called the drug ''moderately effective.'' Patients who lost 5 percent to 10 percent of their body weight kept it off for at least a year.
   (PROFILE
   (CO:American Home Products; TS:AHP; IG:DRG;)
   (CO:Pfizer Inc; TS:PFE; IG:DRG;)
   (CAT:Business;)
   (CAT:Medical;)
   (CAT:Consumer;)
   )
 Load-Date: February 13, 1998

 

End of Document


62 generic drugs made by PBI - Correction Appended
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)

  Correction Appended
 Times Publishing Company
Section: NATIONAL; RECALLS; Pg. 17A; DIGEST
Length: 579 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON; DETROIT
Body




A Denver generic drug manufacturer has been ordered by the Food and Drug Administration to recall 62 drugs in the wake of evidence it falsified testing of the drugs. The FDA ordered Pharmaceutical Basics Inc. (PBI) in a letter dated May 1 to recall all lots and labels of 62 generic drugs mainly painkillers and asthma and anxiety medication. The letter describes the drugs as a "Class II Health Hazard," which one FDA official said means the drugs "may have some adverse effects but they are reversible." Daryl Johnson, a vice president for PBI, said in a statement: "A panel of scientific experts reviewed those products for safety and effectiveness and to date there is every indication those products are safe and effective." Johnson added that the director of the FDA's Denver district office, John Scharmann, had told PBI that "if there was a problem with the safety and effectiveness (of the drugs), they would have told us to recall them much before now." However, the recall comes on the heels of a report by Richard Kusserow, inspector general for the Department of Health and Human Resources, criticizing the FDA's district office in Denver for failing to detect widespread "fraud" in PBI's applications to the FDA for licenses to the sell the drugs that are now being recalled. It is unclear how much the recall, which involves several million drugs still on store shelves, will cost PBI, Johnson said. For more information on which drugs are being recalled, call the FDA at (800) 332-1088.
Bark Buster
 log splitters
 WASHINGTON Thousands of log splitters sold under the Bark Buster brand name can injure or even kill the users and should be removed from service, government safety experts say. Bark Busters have been blamed in the death of at least one person, the Consumer Products Safety Commission said. But the CPSC said it did not order the recall of the devices because of the low number that were distributed. Four companies made Bark Busters, and about 8,000 were sold nationwide from 1977 to 1988. They are no longer in production. The CPSC said the log splitter lacks several safety features. Bark Buster owners should unbolt, remove and discard the auger tip assembly, the CPSC said.
 
 Eco-Lite charcoal lighter fluid
 WASHINGTON A Minnesota company has recalled about 100,000 bottles of charcoal lighter fluid, the Consumer Products Safety Commission has announced. The company, LanTec of Litchfield, Minn., is recalling the 32-ounce cans of its Eco-Lite charcoal lighter fluid. The CPSC said the alcohol-based starter is "much more flammable" than other lighter fluids, most of which are petroleum-based, and flames might flash back into the bottle and cause an explosion if it is sprayed over hot coals. The agency said Eco-Lite is biodegradable and environmentally safe, and the liquid should be washed down a sink with cold water. Rinsed empty bottles may be returned to the stores from which they were purchased. For information, call LanTec at (612) 693-2477.
 General Motors
 automobiles
 DETROIT General Motors Corp. has recalled about 196,000 1982-86 cars because of a potential problem with parking brakes.  The company said one death and two minor injuries have been linked to the problem. GM said it has recorded 105 incidents of parking brake failure because of the problem. The recall involves 1982-86 Chevrolet Camaros and Pontiac Firebirds and some 1984-86 Pontiac Fieros. Owners are being notified by mail. Repairs will be performed for free.
Correction



An incorrect phone number was provided with a recall notice in Sunday's Times, which said the Food and Drug Administration has ordered the generic drug maker Pharmaceutical Basics Inc. (PBI) to recall 62 drugs in wake of evidence the company falsified testing of the drugs. The FDA urges people with questions to call their doctor or pharmacist. Also, people can call PBI at 1-800-445-8091. Correction-Date: May 7, 1991
 Load-Date: November 12, 1992

 

End of Document


MAKERS OF MERIDIA RELEASING IT WITH A DOSE OF CAUTION.; NEW DIET DRUG ON DECK
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania)
February 13, 1998, Friday,
SOONER EDITION

 Copyright 1998 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY & MEDICINE,
Length: 401 words
Byline: JOHN HENDREN, THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Weight-conscious Americans who have been struggling since the last diet craze ended in a drug recall got good news yesterday: The anti-obesity drug Meridia hits pharmacy shelves this week.
Its maker, Knoll Pharmaceutical Co., is already trying to portray the drug as very different from the two that were pulled from the market in August.
The company says it will try to keep casual dieters from using it for cosmetic slimming.
Meridia, so anxiously awaited that it was honored with dozens of Internet sites before it was even approved by the Food and Drug Administration in November, is expected to be in most drugstores by mid-March.
It's the first prescription anti-obesity drug to hit the market since American Home Products Corp. recalled Redux and fenfluramine - half of the popular ''fen-phen'' diet combination. The FDA requested the recall after the drugs were linked to potentially fatal heart valve damage.
With one in three Americans overweight, the potential market is enormous. Knoll, a unit of Germany's BASF AG, expects the drug's global sales to peak at $ 400 million to $ 500 million a year. Some analysts say it could do far better than that.
Doctors at Nutri/System, a chain of diet clinics with 100,000 clients, will start writing prescriptions as soon as it's in drugstores, said Brian Haveson, the company's president.
Other, older diet drugs are still available, and Pfizer Inc. and Roche Laboratories are working on future drugs. But the August recall left seriously obese people with no satisfactory options, said Morgan Downey, executive director of the American Obesity Association.
Obesity experts hope to avoid the kind of surging popularity that spawned diet ''pill mills'' that pitched Redux and fen-phen as miracle weight-loss cures and then shut down after the recall. Some doctors were prescribing the drugs by telephone.
The criteria approved by the FDA are complex - a ''body mass index'' that declares patients obese if they are 30 percent overweight.
The FDA approved Meridia over the objections of its own scientific advisers, who said potential side effects make the drug too risky. It can cause increases in blood pressure and pulse rate that may endanger patients with hypertension or certain heart conditions, the FDA warned.
The agency called the drug ''moderately effective.'' Patients who lost 5 percent to 10 percent of their body weight kept it off for at least a year.
 Load-Date: February 18, 1998

 

End of Document


Feds Expand Probe of Copley Drug Recalls
The Associated Press
November 10, 1994, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 184 words
Dateline: BOSTON
Body




Another recall by Copley Pharmaceutical Inc. has come under the scrutiny of federal prosecutors, the company said.
The U.S. Attorney's Office in Boston already had subpoenaed documents on the antihistamine drug Brompheril that the generic drug manufacturer recalled in September.
This week, investigators widened their probe to include January's recall of the popular albuterol sulfate inhalant for asthma, the company said after the stock market closed Wednesday.
The company's shares were unchanged at $ 16 in midmorning trading Thursday on the Nasdaq stock market.
Officials at the U.S. Attorney's Office were not immediately available for comment.
Copley had recalled millions of the inhalers because they could have been contaminated by microorganisms. At the time, the Food and Drug Administration said the contamination posed a serious health risk for people with weak immune systems.
Lawsuits have been filed against the company because of the alleged contamination.
Copley, based in Canton, Mass., has annual sales of about $ 50 million. Chemical giant Hoechst AG of Germany owns 51 percent of the company.
 Load-Date: November 10, 1994

 

End of Document


Wyeth-Ayerst Recalls Redux And Pondimin
 Marketletter
September 22, 1997

 Copyright 1997 Responsive Database Services, Inc.
All Rights Reserved
Business and Industry
Copyright 1997 Marketletter Publications Ltd.
Section: ISSN: 0951-3175
Length: 1075 words
Highlight: Wyeth-Ayerst Labs voluntarily recalls antiobesity drugs, Pondimin and Redux, after reports of users developing valvular heart disease
Body




ABSTRACT:
Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories, a unit of American Home Products, has voluntarily recalled the troubled antiobesity drug, Pondimin (fenfluramine). Wyeth-Ayerst also withdrew Redux (dexfenfluramine), which was licensed from Interneuron Pharmaceuticals and developed by French firm Servier. The latter is also withdrawing the drugs in Europe. Researchers from the Mayo Clinic reported that 24 patients, who had taken a combination of fenfluramine and phentermine for an average of one year, had developed valvular heart disease. Reports of abnormal heart valve findings continue to be received by both the companies and the US Food and Drug Administration. The FDA presented new findings of abnormal echocardiograms in patients with no symptoms of heart valve disease. These patients had received either fenfluramine or dexfenfluramine, most often in combination with phentermine, for up to two years. Interneuron sought to recall the drug even though the FDA recently denied a citizen petition which aimed to suspend approval of Redux. In a letter to the attorney who filed the petition, the FDA said that no evidence was presented which would support the withdrawal request. Claims regarding the safety and effectiveness of Redux were also found to be unsubstantiated. An estimated 20.6 million prescriptions were written for these anti-obesity drugs in 1996, according to IMS America figures. After the Mayo Clinic research was highlighted, prescriptions for fenfluramine fell 56% from mid-July through to the end of August, while Redux prescriptions fell 36% and phentermine prescriptions dropped 30%. Even before Wyeth withdrew the drugs, Florida had temporarily banned the fen-phen combination while it evaluated guidelines for physicians. Redux had sales of over $132 million, while Pondimin brought AHP additional revenues of $173 million in the same year. AHP has estimated that the profit loss caused by the recall of these products will be $0.02 per share in the third and fourth quarters of this year and $0.10 per share in 1998. It adds that the one-time cost of product withdrawal will be in the region of $200-$300 million, or $0.20-$0.30 per share after tax. Interneuron estimates that expenses related to the discontinuation of Redux will amount to some $8 million-$12 million. A significant portion of its revenues were derived from sales of Redux.
Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories, a unit of American Home Products, has voluntarily recalled the troubled antiobesity drug Pondimin (fenfluramine). The company says that, in light of new reports, it has also withdrawn Redux (dexfenfluramine) which was licensed from Interneuron Pharmaceuticals and developed by French firm Servier. The latter is also withdrawing the drugs in Europe.
This action is the culmination of events which began when researchers from the Mayo Clinic reported that 24 patients, who had taken a combination of fenfluramine and phentermine for an average of one year, had developed valvular heart disease (Marketletter July 21).
New Data From The FDA Reports of abnormal heart valve findings continue to be received by both the companies and the US Food and Drug Administration (September 8). Most recently, the FDA presented new findings of abnormal echocardiograms in patients with no symptoms of heart valve disease. These patients had received either fenfluramine or dexfenfluramine, most often in combination with phentermine, for up to two years.
Of 291 patients, 92 had abnormal echocardiograms. There were 80 reports of aortic regurgitation (four of which occurred in patients receiving dexfenfluramine alone or in combination with phentermine) and 23 reports of mitral regurgitation (two of which occurred in patients receiving dexfenfluramine alone or in combination with phentermine). Thus, although dexfenfluramine was not originally investigated by the Mayo Clinic, Interneuron feels that it would be "prudent" to also withdraw Redux from the market.
Interneuron sought to recall the drug even though the FDA recently denied a citizen petition which aimed to suspend approval of Redux. In a letter to the attorney who filed the petition, the FDA said that no evidence was presented which would support the withdrawal request. Claims regarding the safety and effectiveness of Redux were also found to be unsubstantiated.
Last year, an estimated 20.6 million prescriptions were written for these anti-obesity drugs, according to IMS America figures. After the Mayo Clinic research was highlighted, prescriptions for fenfluramine fell 56% from mid-July through to the end of August, while Redux prescriptions fell 36% and phentermine prescriptions dropped 30%. Even before Wyeth withdrew the drugs, Florida had temporarily banned the fen-phen combination while it evaluated guidelines for physicians.
Financial Impact In 1996, Redux had sales of over $132 million, while Pondimin brought AHP additional revenues of $173 million in the same year. AHP has estimated that the profit loss caused by the recall of these products will be $0.02 per share in the third and fourth quarters of this year and $0.10 per share in 1998. It adds that the one-time cost of product withdrawal will be in the region of $200-$300 million, or $0.20-$0.30 per share after tax.
Interneuron estimates that expenses related to the discontinuation of Redux will amount to some $8 million-$12 million. A significant portion of its revenues were derived from sales of Redux. According to Edmund Debler of Mehta & Isaly, the company is in trouble. However, Michael King of Vector Securities feels that the product withdrawal is not fatal for AHP, but he adds that Redux is finished and that makes things riskier for it.
Interneuron will be losing about $10 million annually in royalties, based on projected annual Redux sales of $100 million, Mr King said. Its only other marketed product is PMS Escape, an over-the-counter product which brings in only a few million dollars annually. Other analysts are more optimistic about Interneuron's pipeline, which includes citicoline, an experimental drug for stroke. The company plans to file a New Drug Application for this drug later this year it has estimated sales of $300-$400 million annually.
Maria Corso of Rodman & Renshaw said AHP shares fell partly because the company said its per share earnings would be trimmed by 10 cents next year. Other analysts felt that AHP would comfortably weather the storm without any serious long-term effects.
 Load-Date: December 3, 2004

 

End of Document


Drug dealer's widow recalls raids; The Police Royal Commission
Sydney Morning Herald (Australia)
December 15, 1995 Friday
Late Edition

 Copyright 1995 John Fairfax Publications Pty Ltd All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS AND FEATURES; Pg. 7
Length: 476 words
Byline: MALCOLM BROWN
Body




The wife of a Central Coast heroin dealer told the Police Royal Commission yesterday that her husband, who was murdered in 1988, had dealt in drugs and, from what he told her, had bribed police for years.
She said her husband had alleged Detective Sergeant Wayne Eade extorted $15,000 from him after pulling him over on The Entrance Road and telling him to pay the money or be arrested and locked up.
The woman, GDU8, said her husband came to her home in Charmhaven, where he kept money hidden in the lid of a chest. He said he needed $15,000, and she gave it to him. She understood from him that his dealing was made possible by continuous payments to police.
"Every time he would ask me for money, I would say: 'You should have some,' " she said. "He would say, 'I had to pay out all the coppers.' "
GDU8 said the only direct knowledge she had of police corruption on the Central Coast was after police raided her home on December 5, 1987, when her elder daughter told her police would not oppose bail if they received $20,000.
She obtained bail on December 7. A day or two later, a member of the Commonwealth State Joint Drug Task Force, JTF7, came to her door, saying he had spoken to her husband, who was in hospital after a heart attack, and had "put his hand out". She gave him $20,000.
GDU8, who agreed yesterday that she had a criminal record, denied being involved in drug dealing herself, but was aware of the activities of her husband.
Her house was searched "a couple of times" before December 5, 1987, but she was shocked when about a dozen police arrived at 5 am on the day of her arrest, hurling bricks through the rear glass sliding doors of the house and smashing plumbing during the search. Her daughters, then 15 or 16, were in the house.
She was charged with a drug offence and pleaded not guilty. The case was unresolved on November 1, 1989, when police raided her again and, she alleged, she was "loaded" with heroin.
She abused the police - who included Detectives Eade, Ian Ison and Greg Vicary - but they charged her with being in possession of drugs.
The Crown's evidence in the case arising from 1987 included material from a listening device in her house. In the tape, GDU8 referred to $15,000 and said her husband "owed" it to her.
She was prepared to mention the $15,000 her husband had allegedly paid to corrupt police but her solicitor advised her not to. She was sentenced to five years' jail but acquitted of the charge arising from the 1989 raid.
* Mr Michael Finnane, QC, counsel for the NSW Police Service, said yesterday that four of the police officers named on Wednesday as part of the purge against corrupt police would be permitted to resign. Three others would be served notices asking them to "show cause" why they should not be dismissed.
The Police Board has terminated the service of Chief Superintendent Robert Lysaught.
 Graphic



 
Illus: Det Sgt Wayne Eade ... allegedly extorted $15,000.
 Load-Date: July 23, 2007

 

End of Document


Sales of Other Diet Drugs Take Hit
Associated Press Online
September 30, 1997; Tuesday 13:55 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1997 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Financial pages
Length: 818 words
Byline: JOHN HENDREN 
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




After a year of popping ''fen-phen'' and Redux, Wendy Block is pounding pavement and shedding pounds the old-fashioned way.
''There is no magic pill,'' said Ms. Block, 58, of Wilmington, N.C., who went from 163 pounds to 143 since quitting the diet pills and moving into the Structure House clinic in nearby Durham last month. ''The magic is getting away from the table and getting some exercise.''
Since the recall of the diet drugs Redux and fenfluramine one half of the fen-phen drug cocktail many of the 6 million patients who used them for a quick weight-loss fix have quit cold turkey. The effects of the diet drug scare have gone beyond Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories, which made the recalled drugs, and is cutting into sales of another obesity pill, phentermine the still-legal half of fen-phen.
The number of new phentermine prescriptions dropped nearly 10 percent in the week ended Sept. 19, from 105,800 the previous week to 96,044, according to IMS America Ltd., a drug industry research firm in Plymouth Meeting, Pa. That's less than half the peak level of 209,154, reached the week ended April 18.
And those are just new prescriptions.
Total prescriptions of phentermine have plunged from a weekly peak in April of 258,983 to 123,868 the week American Home Products' Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories division recalled Redux and fenfluramine, trade-named Pondimin. The company pulled the drugs off the market at the Food and Drug Administration's request after a Mayo Clinic study linked the drugs to apparent heart valve damage.
Some doctors say the scare over obesity nostrums has a healthy side-effect: driving patients away from weight-loss remedies that imperil their health for what even drug makers concede is a temporary fix.
''What I'm hoping happens is people say, 'Hey I'm going to have to do this myself,''' said Structure House Director Dr. Gerard J. Musante, a psychologist. ''If that point can come out of all this, then perhaps some of the concerns coming out of this would be worth it.''
For dieters like Teresa Smallwood, health concerns act as a deterrent against any appetite suppressant.
After giving up on an herbal diet aid ''It made me sick'' _ she signed up at a Chicago-area Jenny Craig diet center. The chain replaced its offering of diet pills with a more traditional weight loss regimen shortly before the drugs were recalled.
''It's healthier,'' she said of her diet and exercise routine. ''I feel better than I have in a very long time health-wise. I've already told all my friends not to try diet drugs.''
Many diet centers and doctors are still using phentermine, curbing its side-effects with drugs other than fenfluramine. The Nutri/System diet chain is using the anti-depressant Prozac, while some doctors use the antidepressants Zoloft and Paxil.
And health stores such as General Nutrition Center report increased sales of herbal remedies, such as St. John's Wort, which contains a chemical similar to the depression drugs. The FDA is considering a ban on ''herbal fen-phen'' and other weight-loss supplements that contain ephedrine, saying they too may be dangerous.
Phentermine maker Medeva PLC isn't idly watching the erosion of its market share.
The British company's Westport, Conn.-based American subsidiary is offering $10 discounts on the first month's prescription, which costs approximately $40. It recently wrote about 200,000 doctors and 50,000 pharmacists to clarify that the drug was not among those recalled. A company spokeswoman in London declined to attribute the move to slackened sales.
''We felt it prudent in the circumstances just to clarify to doctors that phentermine was not pulled from the market,'' said the spokeswoman, who spoke on condition of anonymity. ''The first priority has to be that physicians know the facts about phentermine.''
As phentermine sales suffer, American Home Products has given up the $400 million in annual earnings on its obesity drugs due to the recall.
Total prescriptions of its fenfluramine, trade-named Pondimin, dropped from 35,534 for the seven days ended Sept. 12 to 10,410 the week ended Sept. 19 well off their weekly peak of 153,786 in February. Sales for the final week all occurred in the two days before the recall took effect Sept. 15.
Total prescriptions of the chemically related drug Redux, or dexfenfluramine, fell to 8,482 in the final week, from 30,559 the previous week and an all-time weekly high of 90,474 in February.
Sales went to zero for both drugs after the recall, and that's not likely to change, said J.R. Stafford, chairman and chief executive officer of American Home Products.
Even if studies clear the drugs of causing heart valve damage, he said Monday, ''we have no plans to reintroduce the products to
he market.''
   (PROFILE
   (CO:American Home Products; TS:AHP; IG:DRG;)
   (CO:Jenny Craig; TS:JC; IG:HOU;)
   (CO:Medeva PLC; TS:MDV; IG:DRG;)
   (CAT:Business;)
   (CAT:Medical;)
   (CAT:Consumer;)
   )
 Load-Date: September 30, 1997

 

End of Document


MIX-UP FORCES PRESCRIPTION DRUG RECALL
St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
October 7, 1990, SUNDAY, THREE STAR Edition

 Copyright 1990 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1C
Length: 137 words
Body




WASHINGTON (AP) - Two lots of a prescription antihistamine are being recalled because the packages may contain a blood pressure medicine.  The antihistamine is Bioline brand hydroxyzine pamoate in 50 milligram capsules, the Food and Drug Administration announced Tuesday.
The blood pressure medicine - 2 mg clonidine hydrochloride - comes in scored, peach-colored tablets, with a ''dp'' logo above the score line and ''02'' below the line. Someone who takes the blood pressure drug in the amounts directed for the antihistamine could become dizzy and fall, the agency said.  Both drugs are made by Duramed Pharmaceuticals of Cincinnati. Distributor Bioline Laboratories of Fort Lauderdale, Fla., is asking pharmacists to examine lots 91009 and 91240. About 237 bottles from these lots were distributed nationally, the FDA said.
 Load-Date: October 18, 1993

 

End of Document


Anti-Obesity Drug Hits Market
Associated Press Online
February 13, 1998; Friday 08:24 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic, non-Washington, general news item
Length: 558 words
Byline: JOHN HENDREN 
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Dieters still smarting from the recall of the popular ''fen-phen'' drugs last year, take heart a new anti-obesity drug will appear in stores this week.
Hopes are high that Meridia, the new product from Knoll Pharmaceutical Co., will become the dominant diet drug. With one in three Americans overweight, the potential market is enormous.
Meridia is the first prescription anti-obesity drug to hit the market since American Home Products Corp. recalled Redux and fenfluramine half of the popular ''fen-phen'' diet cocktail. Federal regulators requested the recall after linking the drugs with potentially fatal heart valve damage.
Knoll said the drug's global sales could reach $500 million a year. Some analysts say it could far exceed that number, once the drug hits most stores by mid-March.
Doctors at Nutri/System, a chain of diet clinics with 100,000 clients, will start writing prescriptions ''as soon as it's in drugstores,'' said Brian Haveson, the company's president.
Knoll has begun a marketing pitch saying the drug is very different from the drugs pulled in August. The company says it will try to keep casual dieters from using it for cosmetic slimming.
''We are reaching out to doctors to partner with them to ensure that Meridia is used on the right patients, in the right way, for the right reasons,'' Knoll marketing head Steve Freeman said Thursday.
Older diet drugs are still available and Pfizer Inc. and Roche Laboratories are working on more. But the recall left seriously obese people with no satisfactory options, said Morgan Downey, executive director of the American Obesity Association.
The recalled drugs fooled patients into feeling full by boosting production of a brain chemical called serotonin. Meridia, known chemically as sibutramine, slows the body's dissipation of serotonin.
Obesity experts hope to avoid the kind of surging popularity that spawned ''pill mills,'' where Redux and fen-phen were pitched as miracle weight-loss cures before shutting down after the recall. Some doctors were prescribing the drugs by telephone.
''As we saw with Redux, there's a tremendous pent-up market in weight loss,'' Downey said. ''I think I hope the public has learned there is a danger in prescribing this to individuals who do not fit the criteria.''
The criteria approved by the Food and Drug Administration are complex, declaring most patients as obese if they reach a level of 30 or higher on a ''mass body index.''
That fit Neil Campbell, a 48-year-old management consultant from Santa Monica, Calif., who had a BMI of 34. After taking part in a six-month research trial of Meridia, his 6-foot-4 frame went from 280 pounds to 240.
''It took the edge off the hunger,'' Campbell said. ''I wouldn't feel I had to put everything into my mouth.''
The FDA approved Meridia in November over the objections of its own scientific advisers, who said potential side effects make the drug too risky. It can cause increases in blood pressure and pulse rate that may endanger patients with hypertension or certain heart conditions, the FDA warned.
The agency called the drug ''moderately effective.'' Patients who lost 5 percent to 10 percent of their body weight kept it off for at least a year.
   (PROFILE
   (CO:American Home Products; TS:AHP; IG:DRG;)
   (CO:Pfizer Inc; TS:PFE; IG:DRG;)
   (CAT:Business;)
   (CAT:Medical;)
   (CAT:Consumer;)
   )
 Load-Date: February 13, 1998

 

End of Document


Diet-drug users stop cold turkey
The Pantagraph (Bloomington, IL)
October 1, 1997 Wednesday,
FINAL EDITION

 Copyright 1997 The Pantagraph
Section: NEWS;
Length: 253 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




After a year of popping fen-phen and downing
Redux, Wendy Block is losing weight the old-fashioned way: eating
less and exercising.
"There is no magic pill," said Ms. Block, 58, of Wilmington,
N.C., who went from 163 pounds to 143 since quitting the diet drugs
and moving into the Structure House weight-loss clinic in nearby
Durham last month.  
AP"The magic is getting away from the table and
getting some exercise. "
Since the recall of the diet drugs Redux and fenfluramine - one-half
of the drug cocktail known as fen-phen - many of the 6 million patients
who used them for a quick weight-loss fix have quit cold turkey.
The diet drug scare is also cutting into sales of another obesity
pill, phentermine - the still-legal half of fen-phen.
Total prescriptions of phentermine have plunged from a weekly
peak in April of 258,983 to 123,868 the week Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories,
the maker of Redux and fenfluramine, recalled the two drugs, according
the research firm IMS America Ltd.
Wyeth-Ayerst pulled the two drugs off the market at the Food
and Drug Administration's request after a Mayo Clinic study linked
them to potentially fatal heart valve damage.
Some doctors say the scare could have a healthy side effect.
"What I'm hoping happens is people say, 'Hey, I'm going to have
to do this myself,"' said Structure House director Gerard J. Musante,
a psychologist.  "If that point can come out of all this, then perhaps
some of the concerns coming out of this would be worth it. "
 Load-Date: October 2, 1997

 

End of Document


Health food supplement cited in 14 U.S. deaths, group says
The Toronto Star
February 16, 1990, Friday, ME1

 Copyright 1990 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
Section: NEWS; Pg. B10
Length: 250 words
Byline: (AP)
Dateline: ATLANTA
Body



ATLANTA (AP) - At least 14 deaths and more than 1,200 cases of a rare, painful blood disorder have been attributed to the health food supplement L-tryptophan, the U.S. Centres for Disease Control reported yesterday.
The group said it has received reports of 1,269 cases of eosinophilia-myalgia syndrome, the disorder first linked in November to L-tryptophan.
A total of 210 cases, including four deaths, have been reported in California. The group studied files on 118 of those cases and found that 89 per cent were female and 94 per cent non-Hispanic whites.
The median time between use of L-tryptophan and the onset of symptoms was 152 days.
The disorder is marked by an abnormally high number of white blood cells called eosinophils. It causes severe muscle pain and can cause death.
About two-thirds of the California patients also suffered coughing and rashes. Other symptoms include arm and leg swelling and fever.
Most patients recover. In California, 29 per cent of the patients had to be sent to hospital.
Scientists are investigating the outbreak. The U.S. government issued a recall request for L-tryptophan on Nov. 17 and expanded it four days later to block importation of the product, a protein component widely taken as a nutritional supplement.
Last month, the government cautioned consumers against buying L-tryptophan products from a California company which, the agency said, did not comply with the recall request.United; States; drug; recall
 Load-Date: May 13, 1999

 

End of Document


CRITICS CONSIDER NEW PRESSURE'S EFFECT ON FDA / THE AGENCY'S RECORD PACE FOR DRUG APPROVALS AND RECALLS MAY LEAD TO CONGRESSIONAL HEARINGS INTO ITS SCREENING PROCESS.
 The Philadelphia Inquirer
JUNE 28, 1998 Sunday D EDITION

 Copyright 1998 Philadelphia Newspapers, LLC  All Rights Reserved
 
Section: SUNDAY REVIEW; Pg. E03
Length: 858 words
Byline: Raja Mishra, INQUIRER WASHINGTON BUREAU
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




Last week, after pulling a drug off the market for the fourth time in just nine months, the Food and Drug Administration came under renewed scrutiny from critics worried that pressure to approve drugs more quickly had made the agency less methodical.
Members of Congress who oversee the FDA stepped up their inquiry into the agency's drug-screening process, and congressional hearings could soon follow, Senate staff members said.
The FDA has approved 92 drugs in the last two years. That is a record, as was the recall of the fourth drug, but the agency says the recalls are the result of an improved tracking system.
The FDA recalled the painkiller Duract on Monday after it caused liver damage that resulted in four deaths and eight transplants. The withdrawal was especially troubling to critics because the FDA had known beforehand that Duract could harm the liver yet approved it despite the availability of relatively safer alternatives.
Drug withdrawals by the FDA are rare. There have been only seven in the last decade - four of them since September.
In October, a law went into effect requiring the FDA to approve drugs more quickly. Some health experts fear that the law - and the years of FDA bashing that preceded it - has placed too much pressure on the scientists whose job it is to protect the public from dangerous pharmaceuticals.
"Speed is not the only issue; we have to look at safety," said Thomas Moore, a health-policy researcher at George Washington University whose criticism earlier this month led to a continuing Senate inquiry into the FDA. "We've never had a 12-month period with so many drugs withdrawn."
Last September, the popular diet drugs Redux and Pondimin, known as fen-phen, were withdrawn after they were found to cause potentially fatal heart-valve problems. Then, on June 8, the FDA pulled Posicor, a drug for high blood pressure because tests revealed that it interacted lethally with a long list of common drugs.
The serious liver ailments caused by Duract did not show up among the 2,500 people tested in a trial group before the drug was approved for use. The FDA's defenders argue that the system worked as it should because it caught those problems, which occur in about one in 25,000 patients, not long after the drug was released.
The liver ailment is "a rare condition that couldn't be discovered premarketing," said Dr. Philip de Vane, vice president of Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories, the St. Davids company that makes Duract. "You see here an example of the system working."
Documents show that the FDA was aware early on of the drug's potential to cause a dangerous buildup of liver enzymes known as hepatoxicity.
"There appears to be significant hepatoxicity," the FDA wrote in a memo before approving the drug.
The FDA also warned Wyeth-Ayerst that anyone using Duract for more than 10 days could experience liver complications and ordered the company to print an explicit warning on the drug's package.
"Please note that any advertising and/or promotional activities of this product will be considered false and misleading if it presents suggestions or representations that this product is safe and effective for any use longer than 10 days," warned Michael Weintraub, FDA director of drug evaluation, in a letter to Wyeth-Ayerst.
The drug, as sold, did contain such a warning, but FDA critics noted the existence of alternatives, such as ibuprofen, that are less likely to cause liver damage. They questioned the need to release a drug that raised safety concerns.
"That's a good question," said Joe Karpinski of the Senate Labor Committee staff. "We're really just in the midst of our inquiry."
Senate Labor Committee Chairman James Jeffords (R., Vt.) championed the law that speeded up the drug-approval process. He is responsible for overseeing the process. Karpinski said if the Senate inquiry finds problems, Jeffords would call for hearings.
Meanwhile, the staff of the committee's ranking Democrat, Sen. Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, began its own inquiry into FDA drug screening on Tuesday.
Of the 12 people who were casualties of Duract, 11 used the drug for longer than 10 days. Moore, the health analyst from George Washington University, said patients tend to improvise with painkillers and should not be expected to follow precisely the instructions on Duract's packaging.
"This is like making a car that could kill a driver going over 35 m.p.h. but containing a warning not to do so," he said.
FDA spokesman Lawrence Bachoric said the lesson to be learned was that patients need to be educated about the drugs they take.
De Vane of Wyeth-Ayerst argues that the drug was designed for sudden, quick pains, such as those following surgery or caused by a sprain. Duract's packaging clearly spelled out how the drug should be used, he said.
"The drug was never intended for long-term use," said de Vane, adding that Wyeth-Ayerst had no plans to reintroduce the drug.
The FDA also noted that there have been more than 250,000 reports of adverse drug reactions from doctors, double the number in prior years. It said that showed that the system to monitor drugs after they had been released had improved.
 Load-Date: October 24, 2002

 

End of Document


New diet drug debuts; First to hit market since 'fen-phen' recalled
INTELLIGENCER JOURNAL (LANCASTER, PA.)
February 13, 1998, Friday

 Copyright 1998 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: NEWS,
Length: 484 words
Body




NEW YORK (AP) - Weight-conscious Americans who have been struggling since the last diet craze ended in a drug recall got good news Thursday: The anti-obesity drug Meridia hits pharmacy shelves this week.
Its maker, Knoll Pharmaceutical Co., is already trying to portray the drug as very different from the two that were pulled from the market in August.
The company says it will try to keep casual dieters from using it for cosmetic slimming.
AP#DIETDRUG.PG2#
"We are reaching out to doctors to partner with them to ensure that Meridia is used on the right patients, in the right way, for the right reasons," Knoll marketing head Steve Freeman said Thursday.
Meridia, so anxiously awaited that it was honored with dozens of Internet sites before it was even approved by the Food and Drug Administration in November, is expected to be in most drugstores by mid-March.
It's the first prescription anti-obesity drug to hit the market since American Home Products Corp. recalled Redux and fenfluramine - half of the popular "fen-phen" diet combination. The FDA requested the recall after the drugs were linked to potentially fatal heart valve damage.
With one in three Americans overweight, the potential market is enormous. Knoll, a unit of Germany's BASF AG, expects the drug's global sales to peak at $400 million to $500 million a year. Some analysts say it could do far better than that.
Doctors at Nutri/System, a chain of diet clinics with 100,000 clients, will start writing prescriptions as soon as it's in drugstores, said Brian Haveson, the company's president.
Other, older diet drugs are still available, and Pfizer Inc. and Roche Laboratories are working on future drugs. But the August recall left seriously obese people with no satisfactory options, said Morgan Downey, executive director of the American Obesity Association.
Obesity experts hope to avoid the kind of surging popularity that spawned diet "pill mills" that pitched Redux and fen-phen as miracle weight-loss cures and then shut down after the recall. Some doctors were prescribing the drugs by telephone.
"I think - I hope - the public has learned there is a danger in prescribing this to individuals who do not fit the criteria," Downey said.
The criteria approved by the FDA is complex, declaring most patients as obese if they reach a level of 30 or higher on a "mass body index."
That fit Neil Campbell, a 48-year-old management consultant from Santa Monica, Calif., who had a BMI of 34. After taking part in a six-month research trial of Meridia, his 6-foot-4 frame went from 280 pounds to 240.
"It took the edge off the hunger," Campbell said. "I wouldn't feel I had to put everything into my mouth."
The FDA approved Meridia over the objections of its own scientific advisers, who said potential side effects make the drug too risky. It can cause increases in blood pressure and pulse rate that may endanger patients with hypertension.
 Load-Date: October 14, 1999

 

End of Document


Diet-drug users going cold turkey
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
October 1, 1997, Wednesday

 Copyright 1997 Telegraph Herald
Section: National/World; Pg. a 5
Length: 386 words
Byline: Associated Press
Dateline: NEW YORK (AP)
Body




After a year of popping fen-phen and downing Redux, Wendy Block is losing weight the old-fashioned way: eating less and exercising.
"There is no magic pill," said Block, 58, of Wilmington, N.C., who went from 163 pounds to 143 since quitting the diet drugs and moving into the Structure House weight-loss clinic in nearby Durham last month. "The magic is getting away from the table and getting some exercise."
Since the recall of the diet drugs Redux and fenfluramine - one-half of the drug cocktail known as fen-phen - many of the 6 million patients who used them for a quick weight-loss fix have quit cold turkey.
The diet drug scare is also cutting into sales of another obesity pill, phentermine - the still-legal half of fen-phen.
Total prescriptions of phentermine have plunged from a weekly peak in April of 258,983 to 123,868 the week Wyeth-Ayerst Laboratories, the maker of Redux and fenfluramine, recalled the two drugs, according to the research firm IMS America Ltd.
Wyeth-Ayerst pulled the two drugs off the market at the Food and Drug Administration's request after a Mayo Clinic study linked them to potentially fatal heart valve damage.
Some doctors say the scare could have a healthy side effect.
"What I'm hoping happens is people say, 'Hey, I'm going to have to do this myself,"' said Structure House director Gerard J. Musante, a psychologist. "If that point can come out of all this, then perhaps some of the concerns coming out of this would be worth it."
After giving up on an herbal diet aid - "It made me sick" - Teresa Smallwood signed up at a Chicago-area Jenny Craig diet center. The chain replaced its offering of diet pills with a traditional weight-loss regimen shortly before the drugs were recalled.
"It's healthier," Smallwood said of her diet-and-exercise routine. "I feel better than I have in a very long time health-wise. I've already told all my friends not to try diet drugs."
Fenfluramine is not actually a weight-loss drug. Instead, it is given to counter the side effects of phentermine, which include jitters, dry mouth and constipation.
Many diet centers and doctors are still using phentermine, curbing its side effects with antidepressants such as Prozac or Zoloft. And health stores continue to sell "herbal fen-phen," which is chemically different from the prescription fen-phen.
 Load-Date: October 2, 1997

 

End of Document


Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Earnings Rise 19.5 Percent in Third Quarter
October 23, 1996, Wednesday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 382 words
Dateline: COLLEGEVILLE, Pa.
Body




Drugmaker Rhone-Poulenc Rorer reported a 19.5 percent increase in earnings, despite a costly recall of a drug used to treat shock, trauma and burns.
The French company, which has a U.S. operation at Collegeville, said Wednesday it earned $ 97.4 million, or 72 cents a share, in the third quarter, compared with $ 81.5 million, or 61 cents a share, in the same 1995 period.
Earnings in the past three months were reduced by $ 33.8 million after taxes, or by 17 cents a share, because of the recall of a drug known as Albuminar, or Plasma Plex, because of evidence of tainted shipments. Rhone-Poulenc Rorer owns 50 percent of Centeon, the company that makes the drug.
Because shipments are not expected to resume before January, lost sales will hurt profit in the fourth quarter, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer said.
The company's stock fell 3.6 percent on the report, even though results from its operations were above analysts' expectations.
Revenue in the quarter declined 1 percent, to $ 1.28 billion from $ 1.3 billion a year earlier.
The sale of its generic drugs business in the United Kingdom and the licensing to Medeva plc of certain products held down revenue, as did unfavorable foreign exchange rates on operations outside the United States.
U.S. sales of the anti-clotting drug Lovenox doubled and other products posted gains. European sales tapered off, company spokesman Bob Pearson said, in part because of the French government's efforts to cut health care costs.
"We will continue to focus on innovation as our top strategic priority," said Michel de Rosen, chairman and CEO.
Future success, he said, depends on Taxotere, a chemotherapy drug in use in the United States and Europe and pending approval in Japan; Lovenox, the subject of an American Medical Association study to be released next month; and Synercid, a new antibiotic under development.
For the first nine months of the year, RPR earned $ 263.3 million, or $ 1.94 a share, on revenue of $ 3.90 billion. In the first nine months of 1995, the company earned $ 204.6 million, or $ 1.51 a share, on revenue of $ 3.79 billion.
In trading Wednesday on the New York Stock Exchange, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer closed down $ 2.62 at $ 70.37 a share. The major shareholder in the Collegeville, Pa.-based company is French chemical giant Rhone-Poulenc S.A.
 Load-Date: October 23, 1996

 

End of Document


MAJOR DRUG COMPANY RECALLS SYRUP BATCH
COURIER-MAIL
August 31, 1990 Friday

 Copyright 1990 Nationwide News Pty Limited
Length: 200 words
Byline: MAHER S
Body




Major drug company recalls baby syrup A MAJOR drug company has recalled 5000 bottles of Brondecon paediatric syrup after an abnormal reaction was found in control samples. The pharmaceutical manager for Parke Davis, Mr Derek Tye, said yesterday the company estimated about 1500 bottles of the batch, number 062794, which was manufactured in July, had been distributed to consumers around Australia.
QNPHe said the syrup, which was available over the counter and used mainly for treatment of bronchitis and bronchial asthma, was not a popular product in Queensland. ""It was not a big seller in Queensland. About 15 percent of the national figure would have been sold in Queensland," he said. Mr Tye said the recall was ""a quality control exercise". He said crystallisation of theothylline, the active ingredient in the mixture, had been found in a control sample but it did not represent a health risk. He said other batches of the product were not involved in the recall . The batch number can be found in the lower right hand label corner after a capital B appears in a circle. He said people with the affected batch should stop using it immediately and return it to their local pharmacy or Parke Davis.
 Load-Date: September 24, 2003

 

End of Document


Diet Drug Maker Buried in Suits Company Expects to Beat Cascade of Class Actions
The Daily Record (Baltimore, MD.)
September 30, 1997, Tuesday

 Copyright 1997 The Daily Record Co.
Section: Pg.  3
Length: 683 words
Byline: By John Hendren; Associated Press
Body




American Home Products executives said yesterday the recall of two diet drugs has prompted 21 class action lawsuits from dieters, but they also said the law is on the drug maker's side.
The Madison, N.J.-based consumer products giant did receive 11 ''adverse drug reports'' on the diet drugs Redux and Pondimin, out of six million users, before a Mayo Clinic report linked the drugs to heart problems in May. But the reports from patients were ''very isolated and very scattered,'' company general counsel Louis L. Hoynes Jr. told analysts at a meeting in New York.
The company said it should have little to fear from the class-action suits and dozens more filed by individuals because the company had no duty to warn patients of side-effects of which it knew nothing.
''The law does not impose a duty to warn about an unknown and unintended risk,'' Hoynes said. ''We will proceed knowing that we have always acted responsibly and in a timely manner.''
The company recalled the drugs earlier this month at the request of the Food and Drug Administration, forcing thousands of dieters nationwide to alter their weight-loss regimens.
Analysts say the company's legal exposure is probably limited. Most of the claims come from those who took Pondimin, generically called fenfluramine, with the drug phentermine, a combination known as ''fen-phen'' that was neither approved by the FDA nor promoted by the company, the company said.  Pondimin, generically known as fenfluramine, had been on the market since 1973 in the United States. Redux, or dexfenfluramine, was used in Europe for 10 years, although it was only approved in the United States in mid-1996.  The company pointed out that the Mayo study did not show that the drugs caused heart damage, only that a statistical link may exist.  Several analysts have urged investors to buy the stock. The company has already earned half of the $ 400 million analysts at Salomon Brothers had expected the company's Wyeth-Ayerst division to earn on the obesity drugs this year.
But even if the company is found to be responsible, its penalty is unlikely to go much beyond the $ 2.8 billion settlement it reached for patients who used the Dalkon Shield birth control device, said Mariola Haggar, an analyst at Deutsche Morgan Grenfell. The company could raise that amount by using its estimated $ 1 billion in product liability insurance, $ 1 billion in cash reserves, $ 2 billion it could garner by selling its medical devices division, she said.
The company has no further plans to market an obesity drug, and sent one candidate back into early development after it failed to show satisfactory results, Wyeth-Ayerst President Robert I. Levy said.
And unlike Servier, which markets Redux in Europe, American Home Products does not foresee putting Redux and Pondimin back on the market -- even if it is cleared of the suspected side-effects in future tests -- said John R. Stafford, AHP's chairman, president and chief executive officer.
''Right now we have no plans and are not giving any consideration to remarketing them,'' he said.
American Home estimates the drug recall will cost it $ 300 million before taxes. Without that, earnings would have grown 10 percent in the third quarter and 12 to 13 percent for the year. The recall is expected to cost 10 cents a share for the year, lowering analysts' 1997 earnings estimates to about $ 3.34.
The company gathered analysts to preview its upcoming drug lines. Among the products that drew enthusiasm was Fiblast, a drug in early-stage development to treat stroke victims. The company introduced TSE-424, its own entry into a competitive race among drug makers to develop a product to replace Premarin, the Wyeth-Ayerst estrogen drug that, at $ 1 billion, is the best-selling drug in the nation. Unlike Eli Lilly & Co.'s raloxifene, which could receive FDA approval in November, TSE-424 is in early tests.
Nevertheless, many analysts were looking at a bright future for the company.
''The pipeline for this company now appears better than it has for 15 or 20 years,'' Haggar said.
 Load-Date: November 12, 1997

 

End of Document


Green Cross to post interim group loss on drug recall
Japan Economic Newswire
OCTOBER 31, 1997, FRIDAY

 Copyright 1997 Kyodo News Service
Length: 196 words
Dateline: OSAKA, Oct. 31 Kyodo
Body




Green Cross Corp. said Friday it expects a consolidated net loss in fiscal 1997 as its U.S. subsidiary has incurred a loss of 10 million dollars, or 1.2 billion yen, in connection with a recall of a drug that could cause a brain disease.
Although it has not been proven that the drug causes the disease, known as Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, the California subsidiary, Alpha Therapeutic Corp., has recalled them at the request of the U.S. government, Green Cross said.
The Osaka-based drug maker estimated the net group loss at 1.8 billion yen.
The company revised its consolidated earnings projection for fiscal 1997 to a pretax profit of 100 million yen and sales of 114 billion yen from the 4.5 billion and 124 billion yen for profit and sales, respectively, in its initial forecast.
For the April-September first half of fiscal 1997, Green Cross reported an unconsolidated pretax loss of 300 million yen on sales of 34.4 billion yen, against a profit of 520 million yen and sales of 36.20 billion yen a year earlier.
The first-half results indicate that the company is still affected by boycotts resulting from its sale of HIV-tainted blood products.
 Load-Date: October 31, 1997

 

End of Document


MPPs support hospital fight
The Toronto Star
June 26, 1998, Friday, METRO EDITION

 Copyright 1998 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
Section: NEWS; Pg. B2
Length: 257 words
Body



MPPs have endorsed legislation to save Women's College Hospital, despite reservations that it will now be part of a mega-institution.
"For many people, seeing Women's College change from a free-standing hospital with a long tradition of supporting women's health matters into a part of a huge hospital conglomerate is indeed heartbreaking," NDP health critic Marion Boyd told the Legislature last night.
She made her comments during second and third reading of legislation that legalizes the amalgamation of Women's College with the Sunnybrook Health Science Centre and the Orthopaedic and Arthritic Hospital.
Entrophen drug recalled
A drug company is recalling their aspirin from shelves in the Toronto area because they don't have child resistant safety seals.
The package labels for Entrophen 500 mg with 100 tablets and Entrophen 325 mg with 100 caplets say they have a child-resistant cap, but they don't, said a spokesperson for Johnson and Johnson-Merck Consumer Pharmaceuticals.
Call 1-800-265-7323 for a refund or exchange.
Kidnapper sentenced
A Toronto woman was given a suspended sentence for her part in kidnapping and forcing two young women to work as prostitutes last year.
Lee Ann Manuel, 23, pleaded guilty to two counts of kidnapping and one count of weapons dangerous yesterday in Ontario Court, provincial division. Several other charges were dropped.
Manuel had already served seven months in jail. She must perform 100 hours of community service, and will be on probation three years.
 Load-Date: March 25, 1999

 

End of Document


New Diet Drug Coming Next week BY JOHN HENDREN  AP Business Writer 
Associated Press Online
February 12, 1998; Thursday 21:26 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Domestic, non-Washington, general news item
Length: 537 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Weight-conscious Americans who have been struggling since the last diet craze ended in a drug recall got good news Thursday: The anti-obesity drug Meridia hits pharmacy shelves this week.
Its maker, Knoll Pharmaceutical Co., is already trying to portray the drug as very different from the two that were pulled from the market in August.
The company says it will try to keep casual dieters from using it for cosmetic slimming.
''We are reaching out to doctors to partner with them to ensure that Meridia is used on the right patients, in the right way, for the right reasons,'' Knoll marketing head Steve Freeman said Thursday.
Meridia, so anxiously awaited that it was honored with dozens of Internet sites before it was even approved by the Food and Drug Administration in November, is expected to be in most drugstores by mid-March.
It's the first prescription anti-obesity drug to hit the market since American Home Products Corp. recalled Redux and fenfluramine half of the popular ''fen-phen'' diet combination. The FDA requested the recall after the drugs were linked to potentially fatal heart valve damage.
With one in three Americans overweight, the potential market is enormous. Knoll, a unit of Germany's BASF AG, expects the drug's global sales to peak at $400 million to $500 million a year. Some analysts say it could do far better than that.
Doctors at Nutri/System, a chain of diet clinics with 100,000 clients, will start writing prescriptions as soon as it's in drugstores, said Brian Haveson, the company's president.
Other, older diet drugs are still available, and Pfizer Inc. and Roche Laboratories are working on future drugs. But the August recall left seriously obese people with no satisfactory options, said Morgan Downey, executive director of the American Obesity Association.
Obesity experts hope to avoid the kind of surging popularity that spawned diet ''pill mills'' that pitched Redux and fen-phen as miracle weight-loss cures and then shut down after the recall. Some doctors were prescribing the drugs by telephone.
''I think I hope the public has learned there is a danger in prescribing this to individuals who do not fit the criteria,'' Downey said.
The criteria approved by the FDA is complex, declaring most patients as obese if they reach a level of 30 or higher on a ''mass body index.''
That fit Neil Campbell, a 48-year-old management consultant from Santa Monica, Calif., who had a BMI of 34. After taking part in a six-month research trial of Meridia, his 6-foot-4 frame went from 280 pounds to 240.
''It took the edge off the hunger,'' Campbell said. ''I wouldn't feel I had to put everything into my mouth.''
The FDA approved Meridia over the objections of its own scientific advisers, who said potential side effects make the drug too risky. It can cause increases in blood pressure and pulse rate that may endanger patients with hypertension or certain heart conditions, the FDA warned.
The agency called the drug ''moderately effective.'' Patients who lost 5 percent to 10 percent of their body weight kept it off for at least a year.
   (PROFILE
   (CO:American Home Products; TS:AHP; IG:DRG;)
   (CO:Pfizer Inc; TS:PFE; IG:DRG;)
   (CAT:Business;)
   (CAT:Medical;)
   (CAT:Consumer;)
   )
 Load-Date: February 12, 1998

 

End of Document


Profit Up 13 Percent
October 25, 1996, Friday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved  The Associated Press
Section: Business News
Length: 209 words
Dateline: PARIS
Body




French pharmaceutical and chemical maker Rhone-Poulenc SA said Friday its third-quarter profit rose 13 percent on higher sales of new products and savings from the purchase of British drug maker Fisons.
The gain beat analysts' estimates largely because a charge to cover the costs of a recall by U.S. unit Rhone-Poulenc Rorer was less than anticipated.
But the company said it would record a 100 million to 200 million franc charge in the fourth quarter to cover the cost of recalling a drug used to treat shock, trauma and burns.
Rhone-Poulenc earned 756 million francs ($ 148.24 million) on sales of 20.47 billion francs in the third quarter. A year earlier the company earned 669 million francs on sales of 19.55 billion francs.
Rhone-Poulenc stock was up 2.5 percent in Paris.
Rhone-Poulenc said the cost of the Albuminar recall was offset by increased sales of new products and lower costs from the integration of Fisons. The company's U.S. Rhone-Poulenc Rorer unit announced earlier this week a third quarter net profit increase of 20 percent to $ 97.4 million.
Analyst expectations for net profit had been around 600 million francs or less for the third quarter, with most counting on a financial charge of at least 100 million francs for the product recall.
 Load-Date: October 25, 1996

 

End of Document


RETRANSMITTING to fix category coding Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Earnings Rise 19.
Associated Press International
October 23, 1996; Wednesday 21:41 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Financial pages
Length: 391 words
Dateline: COLLEGEVILLE, Pennsylvania
Body




Drugmaker Rhone-Poulenc Rorer reported a 19.5 percent increase in earnings, despite a costly recall of a drug used to treat shock, trauma and burns.
The French company, which has a U.S. operation at Collegeville, said Wednesday it earned dlrs 97.4 million, or 72 cents a share, in the third quarter, compared with dlrs 81.5 million, or 61 cents a share, in the same 1995 period.
Earnings in the past three months were reduced by dlrs 33.8 million after taxes, or by 17 cents a share, because of the recall of a drug known as Albuminar, or Plasma Plex, because of evidence of tainted shipments. Rhone-Poulenc Rorer owns 50 percent of Centeon, the company that makes the drug.
Because shipments are not expected to resume before January, lost sales will hurt profit in the fourth quarter, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer said.
The company's stock fell 3.6 percent on the report, even though results from its operations were above analysts' expectations.
Revenue in the quarter declined 1 percent, to dlrs 1.28 billion from dlrs 1.3 billion a year earlier.
The sale of its generic drugs business in the United Kingdom and the licensing to Medeva plc of certain products held down revenue, as did unfavorable foreign exchange rates on operations outside the United States.
U.S. sales of the anti-clotting drug Lovenox doubled and other products posted gains. European sales tapered off, company spokesman Bob Pearson said, in part because of the French government's efforts to cut health care costs.
''We will continue to focus on innovation as our top strategic priority,'' said Michel de Rosen, chairman and CEO.
Future success, he said, depends on Taxotere, a chemotherapy drug in use in the United States and Europe and pending approval in Japan; Lovenox, the subject of an American Medical Association study to be released next month; and Synercid, a new antibiotic under development.
For the first nine months of the year, RPR earned dlrs 263.3 million, or dlrs 1.94 a share, on revenue of dlrs 3.90 billion. In the first nine months of 1995, the company earned dlrs 204.6 million, or dlrs 1.51 a share, on revenue of dlrs 3.79 billion.
In trading Wednesday on the New York Stock Exchange, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer closed down dlrs 2.625 at dlrs 70.375 a share.  The major shareholder in the Collegeville, Pennsylvania-based company is French chemical giant Rhone-Poulenc S.A.
 Load-Date: October 23, 1996

 

End of Document


Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Earnings Rise 19.5 Percent in Third Quarter
Associated Press International
October 23, 1996; Wednesday 21:37 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: International news
Length: 391 words
Dateline: COLLEGEVILLE, Pennsylvania
Body




Drugmaker Rhone-Poulenc Rorer reported a 19.5 percent increase in earnings, despite a costly recall of a drug used to treat shock, trauma and burns.
The French company, which has a U.S. operation at Collegeville, said Wednesday it earned dlrs 97.4 million, or 72 cents a share, in the third quarter, compared with dlrs 81.5 million, or 61 cents a share, in the same 1995 period.
Earnings in the past three months were reduced by dlrs 33.8 million after taxes, or by 17 cents a share, because of the recall of a drug known as Albuminar, or Plasma Plex, because of evidence of tainted shipments. Rhone-Poulenc Rorer owns 50 percent of Centeon, the company that makes the drug.
Because shipments are not expected to resume before January, lost sales will hurt profit in the fourth quarter, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer said.
The company's stock fell 3.6 percent on the report, even though results from its operations were above analysts' expectations.
Revenue in the quarter declined 1 percent, to dlrs 1.28 billion from dlrs 1.3 billion a year earlier.
The sale of its generic drugs business in the United Kingdom and the licensing to Medeva plc of certain products held down revenue, as did unfavorable foreign exchange rates on operations outside the United States.
U.S. sales of the anti-clotting drug Lovenox doubled and other products posted gains. European sales tapered off, company spokesman Bob Pearson said, in part because of the French government's efforts to cut health care costs.
''We will continue to focus on innovation as our top strategic priority,'' said Michel de Rosen, chairman and CEO.
Future success, he said, depends on Taxotere, a chemotherapy drug in use in the United States and Europe and pending approval in Japan; Lovenox, the subject of an American Medical Association study to be released next month; and Synercid, a new antibiotic under development.
For the first nine months of the year, RPR earned dlrs 263.3 million, or dlrs 1.94 a share, on revenue of dlrs 3.90 billion. In the first nine months of 1995, the company earned dlrs 204.6 million, or dlrs 1.51 a share, on revenue of dlrs 3.79 billion.
In trading Wednesday on the New York Stock Exchange, Rhone-Poulenc Rorer closed down dlrs 2.625 at dlrs 70.375 a share.  The major shareholder in the Collegeville, Pennsylvania-based company is French chemical giant Rhone-Poulenc S.A.
 Load-Date: October 23, 1996

 

End of Document


Hospital Group Stops Buying From Lyphomed
The Associated Press
August 27, 1992, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 232 words
Dateline: CHICAGO
Body




An alliance of almost 900 hospitals nationwide says it will stop buying generic drugs from Lyphomed because of quality-control problems.
Voluntary Hospitals of America said Wednesday it will cancel its contracts with Lyphomed, based in the Chicago suburb of Deerfield, effective in October.
Voluntary Hospitals, based in Irving, Texas, has several well-known hospitals in its membership including Northwestern Memorial Hospital in Chicago, Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston and Cedars Sinai Hospital in Los Angeles.
John N. Kapoor, Lyphomed's former owner, has been sued for $ 100 million by its current parent company, Fujisawa Pharmaceutical in Osaka, Japan. Fujisawa contends Kapoor did not reveal during purchase negotiations that it had used false data in applications for drug approvals from the Food and Drug Administration from 1980-1986.
In April, Lyphomed recalled an injectable drug for treating congestive heart failure and other problems.
The company also withdrew applications for four other drugs and said it plans to withdraw four more, all because of questionable claims in the applications. And Lyphomed has recalled some drugs because of improper labeling or improperly filled bottles.
Kapoor has denied the allegations in the lawsuit. He says Fujisawa sued to "save face" after mismanaging the company.
Fujisawa had no immediate comment on the move by the hospital alliance.

 

End of Document


Taiwan drug recall system now in place
Pharma Marketletter
February 10, 1999

 Copyright 1999 Marketletter Publications Ltd.
Length: 194 words
Body




 On February 1, Taiwan's Department of Health began operation of its new system for the recall of defective pharmaceuticals. It operates in three tiers and covers both domestically-produced and imported medicines.
Under the new system, medicines found to be defective will be recalled between 24 hours and six months of the problem being discovered, depending on how great a risk they pose to public health, said Chan Chi-shean, the Department's director general.
 The first tier of the system covers defective products which have been found to cause serious or life-threatening conditions. They will be banned or recalled within 24 hours of being branded defective.
 The second tier covers defective products which have been licensed for production or import, those which are considered counterfeit or of lower quality, and medical equipment that is defective or has been produced without the appropriate approvals. These products will be recalled within three months.
 The final class of products are those which have been manufactured or imported after their licenses have expired, and those with defective packaging or labeling. They will be recalled within six months.
 Load-Date: November 22, 2002

 

End of Document


Negligence charges against ministry officials mulled
Japan Economic Newswire
SEPTEMBER 1, 1996, SUNDAY

 Copyright 1996 Kyodo News Service
Length: 449 words
Dateline: TOKYO, Sept. 1 Kyodo
Body




Prosecutors are considering filing negligence charges against then senior officials at the Health and Welfare Ministry over AIDS deaths among patients, mainly hemophiliacs, caused by the officials' failure to prevent the use of unheated blood products in the mid-1980s, prosecution sources said Sunday.
The officials neither ordered drug companies to recall dangerous untreated blood products nor advised medical institutions to switch to safe heated products, the sources said.
Among the officials is Akihito Matsumura, then head of the ministry's Biologics and Antibiotics Division, which was in charge of blood products.  Matsumura left the ministry earlier this year after heading the Health Service Bureau.
A patient with a liver ailment who died of AIDS last December was infected with AIDS-causing HIV after he was given unheated blood products marketed by Green Cross Corp. in April 1986, nine months after the ministry authorized the use of safe heated blood products in July 1985, the sources noted.
Prosecutors have searched offices of Green Cross for evidence of professional negligence resulting in the man's death, following a murder complaint filed against a former president of Green Gross, Renzo Matsushita.
Green Cross shipped untreated blood products even after the ministry approved heat-treated blood products.
In another case, a hemophilia patient who died of AIDS in 1991 is believed to have contracted the virus through unheated blood products in May and June 1985, shortly before heated products were approved by the ministry.
Prosecutors have arrested Takeshi Abe, 80, a leading hemophilia expert and former vice president of Teikyo University in Tokyo, on suspicion of professional negligence in the case.
Abe headed a study group on AIDS set up at the ministry in 1983 that decided in March 1984 to continue the use of unheated blood products.
Prosecutors believe the ministry should have taken measures at that time such as suspending the sale of unheated blood products or recommending that medical institutions switch to safer blood clotting factors, such as cryoprecipitate, made of domestically supplied blood, as an alternative treatment, the sources said.
The risk of untreated blood product was widely recognized at that time, they said.
The Pharmaceutical Affairs Law empowers the health and welfare minister to order drug companies to stop selling or to recall 'drugs which are or could be tainted with germ bacillus.'
The unheated blood products were not fully withdrawn from the market until 1988.
The products infected some 1,800 hemophiliacs with HIV in the 1980s, of whom more than 400 have since died of AIDS.
 Load-Date: September 3, 1996

 

End of Document


Hong Kong recalls anti-fever drug that turns into jelly
Agence France Presse -- English
October 15, 1999 02:32 GMT

 Copyright 1999 Agence France Presse
Section: International news
Length: 178 words
Dateline: HONG KONG, Oct 15
Body




Hong Kong's Hospital Authority said Friday it has ordered the recall of a liquid anti-fever medication after a defect was found that made the drug turn to jelly.
Hospitals have been told to stop the use of paracetamol oral suspension bearing the name "VIDA" on the bottle cap made by a locally-based pharmaceutical firm, Vida laboratories Ltd.
Tests by the maker showed the defective batch would not pose a threat to patients and "the change in physical outlook is likely caused by inadequate stirring during the production procedures," the Hospital Authority said in a statement.
But it added it was "very concerned" and had reported the incident to the Department of Health for further investigation.
The South China Morning Post newspaper quoted doctors as saying the drug, commonly used to treat fever in children, could lead to minor liver damage in some cases if taken in jelly form.
The authority said 4,000 bottles had been dispensed from 24 public hospitals since September 10. A total of 18,000 had been delivered to the authority.
pl/cf
 Load-Date: October 14, 1999

 

End of Document


Give & Take; Recall of Diet Drug Will Trim MIT's Royalties
Chronicle of Higher Education
October 3, 1997

 Copyright 1997 The Chronicle of Higher Education
Section: MONEY & MANAGEMENT; Pg. A43
Length: 192 words
Body




The government recall of a popular diet drug means leaner revenues for the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, which holds a patent on the drug.
Licensed 10 years ago to a French company, the drug known as dexfenfluramine had produced royalties of about $ 500,000 a year for M.I.T. from European sales in the last several years.
In 1996, the figure shot up to about $ 2-million, when the drug came onto the U.S. market, under the name Redux. A share of that money goes to Richard J. Wurtman, the professor of neuroscience who discovered that dexfenfluramine could aid in weight loss by controlling craving for carbohydrates. The U.S. recall, prompted by reports of dangerous side effects, has since prompted a worldwide halt in sales.
Although the patent runs for about five more years, M.I.T. officials took the recall news in stride. "Royalties like that are treated like a bluebird," said Lita Nelson, director of the Technology Licensing Office. Officials consider such income as fleeting, and spend it on expenses that do not recur, such as special research projects, she said. M.I.T. collected a total of $ 21-million in patent royalties last year.
 Load-Date: January 21, 1999

 

End of Document


SUMITOMO PHARMACEUTICAL CO.: Herpes Drug Is Recalled Because of Contamination
 Wall Street Journal (3 Star, Eastern (Princeton, NJ) Edition)
June 25, 1996

 Copyright 1996 Responsive Database Services, Inc.
All Rights Reserved
Business and Industry
Section: Pg. B4; Vol. CCXXVII; No. 124; ISSN: 0099-9660
Length: 47 words
Highlight: Sumitomo Pharmaceutical is recalling Zovirax, a herpes drug, due to contamination
Body




ABSTRACT:
Sumitomo Pharmaceutical Co (Japan) is recalling Zovirax, a herpes drug, due to contamination. Some of the product was contaminated with insects. Sumitomo sells some Yen39 bil/yr ($357.3 mil/yr) of Zovirax. The company said that the recall will only "minimally impact" its sales.
 Load-Date: September 22, 2004

 

End of Document


New drug's debut could set off diet craze redux
The Associated Press
February 12, 1998, Thursday, PM cycle

 Copyright 1998 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 768 words
Byline: By JOHN HENDREN, AP Business Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Dieters still smarting from the recall of the popular "fen-phen" drugs last year can take heart - a new diet drug will be appearing in drug stores this week.
Hopes are high that Meridia, the new product from Knoll Pharmaceutical Co., could grab a big chunk of the market for diet drugs. With one in three Americans overweight, the potential market is enormous.
Meridia, which got FDA approval in November, is the first prescription anti-obesity drug to hit the market since American Home Products Corp. recalled Redux and fenfluramine - half of the popular "fen-phen" diet cocktail. The FDA requested the recall after linking the drugs with potentially fatal heart valve damage.
Knoll, a unit of Germany's BASF AG, expects the drug's global sales to peak at $ 400 million to $ 500 million a year. Some analysts say it could far exceed that number.
Doctors at Nutri/System, a chain of diet clinics with 100,000 clients, will start writing prescriptions "as soon as it's in drugstores," said Brian Haveson, the company's president. Meridia will start appearing in stores this week, but it will take until mid-March for it to show up in most stores.
In a preemptive strike at critics, Knoll has begun a marketing pitch saying the drug is very different from the two drugs pulled from the market in August. The company says it will actively try to keep casual dieters from using it for cosmetic slimming.
"We are reaching out to doctors to partner with them to ensure that Meridia is used on the right patients, in the right way, for the right reasons," Knoll marketing head Steve Freeman said Thursday.
The drug may be the only way to get many frustrated dieters back in medical treatment programs.
Older diet drugs are still available, and Pfizer Inc. and Roche Laboratories are working on future drugs. But the August recall left seriously obese people with no satisfactory options, said Morgan Downey, executive director of the American Obesity Association.
Obesity experts hope to avoid the kind of surging popularity that spawned diet "pill mills" that pitched Redux and fen-phen as miracle weight-loss cures and then shut down after the recall. Some doctors were prescribing the drugs by telephone.
"As we saw with Redux, there's a tremendous pent-up market in weight loss," Downey said. "I think - I hope - the public has learned there is a danger in prescribing this to individuals who do not fit the criteria."
The criteria approved by the FDA is complex - a "body mass index" that declares most patients obese if they reach a level of 30 or higher on the index.
For instance, Neil Campbell was considered overweight with a BMI of 34, having a weight of 280 pounds and height of 6-foot-4. The Santa Monica, Calif., wine wholesaler usually avoids drugs, but he found he was gaining weight as sales meetings increasingly mingled wine, cheese and fatty luncheon fare. After participating in a six-month research trial of Meridia, he dropped to 240 pounds.
"It took the edge off the hunger," said Campbell, 48, now a management consultant. "Have you ever had the feeling where you've binged on a food, like ice cream or cookies, and started popping them like popcorn? It tended to eliminate that drive. I wouldn't feel I had to put everything into my mouth."
Many weight loss centers plan to stay drug free. Weight Watchers International medical director Dr. Myron Winick said clients can take the drug if they like, but the drug-free chain isn't going to offer doctors to prescribe it. Neither is Structure House in Durham, N.C.
"What happens is that (the drugs) get abused and people who only have a little bit of weight to lose demand them from physicians," said Structure House director Gerard J. Musante, a psychologist. "And physicians, not knowing what to do, prescribe them. That's a concern."
Like Redux and fen-phen, Meridia has raised safety concerns.
The FDA approved it over the objections of its own scientific advisers, who said potential side-effects make the drug too risky. It can cause increases in blood pressure and pulse rate that may endanger patients with hypertension or certain heart conditions, the FDA warned.
The agency called the drug "moderately effective." Patients who lost 5 to 10 percent of their body weight kept it off for at least a year.
Knoll has taken pains to distinguish the drug from Redux and fenfluramine by pointing out that it acts differently on the brain.
The recalled drugs fooled patients into feeling full by boosting production of a brain chemical called serotonin. Meridia, known chemically as sibutramine, slows the body's dissipation of the serotonin it naturally produces.
 Load-Date: February 13, 1998

 

End of Document


Profit Up 13 Percent
Associated Press International
October 25, 1996; Friday 11:27 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1996 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Financial pages
Length: 232 words
Dateline: PARIS
Body




French pharmaceutical and chemical maker Rhone-Poulenc SA said Friday its third-quarter profit rose 13 percent on higher sales of new products and savings from the purchase of British drug maker Fisons.
The gain beat analysts' estimates largely because a charge to cover the costs of a recall by U.S. unit Rhone-Poulenc Rorer was less than anticipated.
But the company said it would record a 100 million to 200 million franc charge (dlrs 20 million to dlrs 40 million) in the fourth quarter to cover the cost of recalling a drug used to treat shock, trauma and burns.
Rhone-Poulenc earned 756 million francs (about dlrs 150 million) on sales of 20.47 billion francs (dlrs 4 billion) in the third quarter. A year earlier the company earned 669 million francs (dlrs 133 million) on sales of 19.55 billion francs (dlrs 3.9 billion).
Rhone-Poulenc stock was up 2.5 percent in Paris.
Rhone-Poulenc said the cost of the Albuminar recall was offset by increased sales of new products and lower costs from the integration of Fisons. The company's U.S. Rhone-Poulenc Rorer unit announced earlier this week a third quarter net profit increase of 20 percent to dlrs 97.4 million.
Analyst expectations for net profit had been around 600 million francs (dlrs 120 million) or less for the third quarter, with most counting on a financial charge of at least 100 million francs (dlrs 20 million) for the product recall.
 Load-Date: October 25, 1996

 

End of Document


Drug Company Recalls of 22 Products
The Associated Press
March 23, 1990, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1990 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 193 words
Dateline: INDIANAPOLIS
Body




A pharmaceutical company announced a recall Thursday of 22 products that do not meet federal standards for manufacturing changes.
Quad Pharmaceuticals Inc. said it was recalling the products following a company-sponsored investigation.
The federal Food and Drug Administration recommended the recall.
FDA spokesman William Grigg said the products are used in hospitals for intravenous treatments and are not common consumer items. He did not have brand names of the products.
Grigg said there were no reports of health problems related to use of the products.
Quad is a subsidiary of Par Pharmaceuticals Inc. of White Springs, N.Y. The company said it was laying off 110 of its 380 employees in response to the recall, which it said would cost $$4 million.
The company did not name the products included in the recall. A company spokesman was unavailable for comment Thursday.
Quad said last week it had halted shipment of 27 drug products and was investigating.
Quad said it was recalling the items because its investigation showed it made minor manufacturing changes in distributed batches without properly adhering to the FDA's regulatory requirements for changes.

 

End of Document


Government Charges Company With Making Defective Drugs
The Associated Press
June 12, 1992, Friday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1992 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 208 words
Dateline: NEW YORK
Body




Federal prosecutors filed suit Friday against generic drug manufacturer Barr Laboratories Inc., charging it with selling inferior and defective drugs, including some that were contaminated or mislabeled.
Assistant U.S. Attorney Beth Kaswan said she knew of no reports of people injured or sickened by the drugs manufactured by Barr.
Inspections by the Food and Drug Administration at Barr's two plants over the past year found hundreds of cases in which drugs failed quality tests.
The government's complaint charged Barr mixed foreign substances into its drugs, used contaminated water in processing antibiotics, distributed mislabeled drugs and repackaged and resold drugs which had been returned as defective.
Prosecutors asked U.S. District Judge Gerard Goettel in White Plains for an order shutting down the company until it passes FDA inspection. Goettel scheduled a hearing for June 24.
Barr vice president Louis Guerci said through his secretary he had not seen the complaint and could not comment.
The company manufactures more than 165 generic drugs in plants in Pomona, N.Y. and Northvale, N.J.
So far this year, Barr has been ordered to recall four drugs: two painkillers, an antibiotic for animals and a medicine used to relieve digestive spasms.

 

End of Document


Drug for bronchial asthma sufferers recalled
United Press International
June 15, 1992, Monday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1992 U.P.I.
Section: Domestic News
Length: 253 words
Dateline: MORTON GROVE, Ill.
Body




A pharmaceutical company Monday recalled a drug used by bronchial asthma and emphysema sufferers, saying microbial growth in some lots of the drug could be life-threatening to some patients.
 Pharmaceutical Basics Inc. announced the voluntary recall of Metaproterenol Sulfate Inhalation Solution, USP, in cooperation with the Food and Drug Administration.
Affected are all lots of 5 percent solution with an expiration date of May 1 or later.
 The prescription drug is dispensed to patients with bronchial asthma or reversible bronchospasm associated with bronchitis or emphysema.
 Routine testing showed the presence of microbial growth -- Pseudomonas gladioli/cepacia -- exceeding specified limits in certain lots marketed under the labels of Dey Laboratories Inc., Goldline Laboratories, H.L. Moore, Qualitest Products Inc., Pharmaceutical Basics Inc. and Rugby Laboratories Inc.
 The microbial growth ''poses a risk of potential serious pulmonary infections to all patients for whom the drug would be prescribed. The FDA has determined that this situation represents a particularly serious health hazard, which may be life-threatening, to patients with chronic obstructive airway disease, with cystic fibrosis or with compromised immune systems,'' the company said in a statement.
 About 16,000 affected units were on the market nationwide.
 PBI also said it has requested pharmacists to review their records from the period after April 1 and notify anyone given one of the affected lots to contact their doctor immediately.

 

End of Document


Generic asthma drug blamed for illnesses; Hundreds sue pharmaceutical company
The Tampa Tribune (Florida)
March 13, 1995, Monday,
FINAL EDITION

 Copyright 1995 The Tribune Co. Publishes The Tampa Tribune
Section: FLORIDA/METRO,
Length: 718 words
Byline: CRAIG S. PALOSKY; Tribune Staff Writer
Dateline: TAMPA
Body




Taylor Atkinson can't walk or crawl, even though he's almost 3.
The best the Tampa boy can manage is a sort of twist of his hips that lets him roll around the floor to get where he wants to go. He doesn't speak beyond the words "Ma" and sometimes "Da."
His parents blame the boy's stunted development on a recalled asthma drug, albuterol, that he took as an infant. Copley Pharmaceuticals Inc. recalled the liquid drug last year after authorities discovered bacteria in some bottles.
"We honestly believe in our hearts that that's what got him sick," said his father, David. "Everything coincided with the day he was put on albuterol, and it was all Copley Pharmaceuticals the entire time."
The Atkinsons aren't alone, either.
Hundreds of families nationwide are suing Copley, claiming the tainted drug caused pneumonia, other respiratory woes and, in some cases, death.
Copley insists the contaminated drug caused no one any harm.
Only a few batches of the drug showed any bacteria, and company tests showed they were of a relatively harmless strain, spokesman Christopher Taylor said. Earlier tests that showed a more dangerous bacteria were wrong, he said.
"We have great sympathy for the families involved, but the company firmly believes that it didn't cause the problems," he said.
The federal Food and Drug Administration seems to support the company's claims, saying it found no cause-and-effect relationship between the drug and illness among the roughly 1,000 complaints received after the recall.
Families such as the Atkinsons aren't convinced, not when they believe their relatives got sicker when they took Copley's generic albuterol. In some cases, patients did well on Proventil, the brand-name albuterol, but got sicker on Copley's products, said Richard McGowan, a New York attorney representing 200 families. Some recovered when they went back to Proventil.
"That's about the best proof you can get in these cases," said McGowan, who is working with the Tallahassee firm, Fonvielle & Hinkle, on the case.
Taylor, the Atkinsons' only child, was born healthy in June 1992. He developed normally until late October that year, when a virus triggered an asthma attack and recurring respiratory problems, his father said. When he got ill again in December, doctors put him on Copley's albuterol, an asthma drug that clears the lungs.
He inhaled the drug as a mist as often as four times a day, but his breathing problems got worse instead of better, his parents say.
By April 1993, they knew Taylor suffered from some kind of serious sickness, but they had no reason to suspect the drug. Doctors ordered all kinds of tests but couldn't pinpoint the cause.
Taylor spent his first birthday in the hospital with double pneumonia and a severe sinus infection. He was still taking albuterol, and his parents knew he was well behind in his mental and physical development.
"When you have a horrible cold, do you feel like doing anything?" his dad said. "Imagine what it's like for an infant. Basically, he just lay there and struggled to breathe."
In January 1994, Copley recalled all of its albuterol, though the Atkinsons didn't connect the drug with Taylor's illness until they saw a law firm's advertisement on albuterol claims.
"You eliminate what isn't causing it, and there's only one thing left standing. It had to be the albuterol," said David Atkinson, who works as a graphics designer for The Tampa Tribune.
Copley also faces a criminal probe in Boston, where two former employees last year told authorities about shoddy production at the two plants where they worked, including the one that made albuterol.
The workers, brothers Mark and Michael Riley, also claim the company falsified production reports and did too little to ensure its drugs' quality. The company denies all the charges. Copley spokesman Taylor described the case as "our word against theirs" and expects the investigation to show no wrongdoing by the company.
The lawsuits themselves may take years to resolve. The first ones may go to trial later this year in Wyoming.
Meanwhile, the Atkinsons rejoice in even the simplest signs of Taylor's progress. Just recently, he learned to sit up on his knees, putting big smiles on his parents' faces.
"We're hoping Taylor will walk someday," his mother said. "We're hoping, praying, that he will talk."
 Graphic



 
PHOTO (C),
 (C) David and Janet Atkinson believe albuterol, a recalled asthma drug, is to blame for son Taylor's stunted development. They are suing maker Copley Pharmaceuticals Inc.  CLIFF McBRIDE, Tribune photo
 Load-Date: March 15, 1995

 

End of Document


Teva: Antibiotic recalled prior to FDA warning
The Jerusalem Post
August 14, 1997, Thursday

 Copyright 1997 The Jerusalem Post
Section: ECONOMICS; Pg. 8
Length: 284 words
Byline: Jerusalem Post Staff
Body




 Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd. had already recalled batches of its Clindamycin antibiotic when it received a warning letter from the US Food and Drug Administration, a spokesperson from Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd. said yesterday in response to wire reports that the FDA told Teva to withdraw batches of its Clindamycin antibiotic.
 In a letter dated July 28 and released two days ago, the FDA stated that Teva did not follow proper procedures in manufacturing and testing the antibiotic, which is made in the company's Paterson New Jersey plant.
"Your commitment to recall all distributed lots of Clindamycin HCL 150 mg capsules is acknowledged with this letter," the FDA wrote in its warning.
 Teva said an undisclosed European supplier failed to follow proper FDA procedures for meeting particle-size criteria before it sold raw materials to Teva. The FDA approved the materials before telling Teva to recall the finished product in post-approval inspection.
 "We recalled the drugs even before we received the letter," said the spokesperson, adding that the drug in its defective form would be less effective, but not harmful. "There is nothing irregular in what happened. A reporter saw the letter and decided to make an item out of it."
 Teva recalled five batches of Clindamycin, whose value totals several tens of thousands of dollars, the spokesperson said.
 In the first six months of the year total sales of the product were less than $ 2m. The recall will not have a significant effect on earnings, the company said.
 Trading of Teva's Nasdaq shares was halted for more than two hours on Tuesday afternoon. The shares closed at $ 55.875, down from $ 56.125.
 Load-Date: August 14, 1997

 

End of Document


Japanese firm starts to recall defective German HIV test drug
Agence France Presse -- English
October 23, 1994 04:39 Eastern Time

 Copyright 1994 Agence France Presse
Section: International news
Length: 400 words
Dateline: TOKYO, Oct 23
Body




The Japanese outlet of a German pharmaceutical maker has started to recall an HIV-testing drug, following reports that the product failed to detect the virus in an HIV-positive subject, a daily said Sunday.
Enzygnost, developed by an affiliate of German drugmaker Hoechst AG, could give inaccurate Human Immuno-deficiency Virus (HIV) test results, showing a negative reaction for people infected with the virus, the Yomiuri Shimbun said.
Hoechst Japan Ltd. reported to the Health and Welfare Ministry here Thursday on the defective drug and started to recall the product, Yomiuri said.
The company immediately suspended the sale of Enzygnost and told some 50 medical facilities and hospitals across Japan not to use the German HIV-testing drug, the paper reported.
The sales unit has sold Enzygnost to about 150,000 people since December, and some people who are HIV-positive may have passed tests with the defective drug, Yomiuri said.
With a growing incidence of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) cases in Japan, the number of people testing for HIV -- the virus that causes the killer disease -- has increased, and more than 100,000 people have tested for the virus at health departments annually over the past couple of years, it said.
The latest available official statistics show that the number of those infected with AIDS or HIV in Japan totalled 3,481 at the end of August.
The Health and Welfare Ministry is to ask Hoechst Japan to provide more data on Enzygnost, the newspaper said.
The Mainichi Shimbun newspaper, meanwhile, siad the ministry concealed AIDS-related information, possibly helping increase the number of HIV carriers.
It said the ministry did not make public the fact that two Japanese pharmaceutical firms had returned imported blood products, suspected of being contaminated with HIV, to the United States.
ss/pvh/msa
AFP
 Load-Date: October 23, 1994

 

End of Document


State wants to regulate 'date-rape' drug
LANCASTER NEW ERA (LANCASTER, PA.)
August 22, 1998, Saturday

 Copyright 1998 Lancaster Newspapers, Inc.
Section: NEWS,
Length: 216 words
Body




STATE COLLEGE (AP) - Pennsylvania Attorney General Mike Fisher appealed to the state Department of Health to declare the date-rape drug GHB a controlled substance, making it illegal to manufacture, sell or possess the drug.
Currently, gamma-hydroxy butyrate is unregulated in Pennsylvania.
AP#XD0041.PMW#
"This deadly drug is a powerful, quick-acting depressant that is growing in popularity among high school and college students," Fisher said at a news conference Friday at Penn State, where two students were hospitalized with seizures this summer after overdosing on GHB. "Why? Because the ingredients are readily available and can be home-brewed in any kitchen sink or bathtub."
GHB, like Rohypnol, is believed to be a drug used to disable women, making them vulnerable to rape, Fisher said. The drug is colorless, odorless and nearly tasteless and can easily be slipped into someone's drink. Unconsciousness and temporary amnesia can follow.
"In more than half of the overdoses reported, those who ingested GHB could not recall taking the drug," Fisher said. "That tells us that the drug may have been secretly placed in the person's food or drink."
First used as a diet drug, then abused as a steroid substitute used by weight lifters, GHB was banned by the Food and Drug Administration in 1990.
 Load-Date: October 14, 1999

 

End of Document


Abbott asks providers to return recalled antibiotic for credit
Modern Healthcare
June 22, 1992

 Copyright 1992 Crain Publishing Inc.
Section: THE WEEK IN HEALTHCARE; Suppliers; Pg. 34
Length: 373 words
Byline: Mary Wagner
Body




Abbott Laboratories is asking hospitals to return for credit unused supplies of temafloxacin, the anti-infection drug it pulled off the market two weeks ago.
Abbott voluntarily recalled the drug after routine monitoring by the Food and Drug Administration showed that the drug, sold under the brand name Omniflox, has been linked to 50 adverse patient reactions, including three deaths. The drug, a broad-spectrum antibiotic used for a variety of infections, was launched in the United States in February. It also had been marketed in Europe and South America.
North Chicago, Ill.-based Abbott has directed hospitals, consumers and wholesalers to return the drug to the company for credit. Physicians received letters asking that they discontinue treating patients with the drug and destroy any samples.
The letters cited reports of adverse patient reactions, including severe hypoglycemia in elderly patients, anemia, liver dysfunction and renal failure requiring dialysis.
Abbott didn't disclose U.S. sales figures for the drug, and group purchasers that had made the drug available to hospitals under contract had little data because the drug was introduced so recently. Some group purchasing organizations said temafloxacin had been sold to hospitals on contract at $ 2 per tablet.
News of the recall sent Abbott's stock tumbling $ 4.88, or 15%, to close at $ 27 per share on June 8 in New York Stock Exchange trading.  Analysts had estimated the potential value of the drug to Abbott at as much as $ 500 million within five years. However, with sales of the drug projected at only about $ 50 million this year, a fraction of the company's $ 6.9 billion in total annual sales, the recall is expected to have little long-term effect on the company's financial performance.
Abbott said it would take a charge against earnings in its second quarter ending June 30 to cover costs associated with the recall.  The company didn't disclose the amount of the charge, but industry analysts estimated it could be $ 50 million to $ 100 million.
A spokesman declined to comment on whether the company had plans to reformulate the drug. It had been sold in tablet form only, although an intravenous formulation was in the works.

 

End of Document


PANEL BACKS IMPORT OF ANTI-INFECTION DRUG
Jiji Press Ticker Service
MARCH 7, 1990, WEDNESDAY

 Copyright 1990 Jiji Press Ltd.
Length: 319 words
Dateline: TOKYO, MARCH 7
Body




A GOVERNMENTAL PANEL WEDNESDAY RECOMMENDED THAT HEALTH AND WELFARE MINISTER YUJI TSUSHIMA APPROVE THE IMPORT OF AN ANTI-INFECTION DRUG.  RECOMMENDED BY THE CENTRAL PHARMACEUTICAL AFFAIRS COUNCIL IS GANCICLOVIR, WHICH IS EFFECTIVE IN COMBATING CYTOMEGALOVIRUS (CMV) INFECTION, WHICH OFTEN ACCOMPANIES ACQUIRED IMMUNE DEFICIENCY SYNDROME (AIDS) AND ORGAN TRANSPLANTATION.
APPROVAL IS EXPECTED TO COME AT THE END OF MARCH, MINISTRY OFFICIALS SAID.  GANCICLOVIR WAS DEVELOPED BY SYNTEX CORP. OF THE UNITED STATES, WHOSE JAPANESE UNIT, NIPPON SYNTEX K.K., APPLIED FOR ITS IMPORT IN DECEMBER 1988.  UPON GOVERNMENTAL APPROVAL, THE DRUG WILL BE MARKETED HERE AS "DENOSINE" FOR INTRAVENOUS DRIP INFUSION.  WHEN IMMUNITY WEAKENS, CMV CAUSES PNEUMONIA AND RETINITIS. IN THE UNITED STATES, THE VIRUS INFECTS AN ESTIMATED 25 PCT OF AIDS PATIENTS AND 10 PCT OF THOSE WHO UNDERGO ORGAN TRANSPLANTATION.  GANCICLOVIR, ALTHOUGH IT HAS A SIDE-EFFECT OF REDUCING WHITE BLOOD CORPUSCLES, IS SAID TO ACT QUICKLY AGAINST CMV.  THE COUNCIL ALSO RECOMMENDED THAT THE MINISTER APPROVE PRODUCTION OF LEVOCARNITINE CHLORIDE, EFFECTIVE FOR ORGANIC ACID METABOLIC DISORDERS.  THE DRUG IS SCHEDULED TO BE MARKETED BY EARTH CHEMICAL CO. AS "L CARTIN." AS PART OF THE SAME RECOMMENDATION, THE COUNCIL ADVISED THE GOVERNMENT TO REVOKE PRODUCTION APPROVAL FOR SALIVARY GLAND HORMONE INJECTION PAROTIN OF TEIKOKU HORMONE MFG. CO. AND PERIODONTAL TABLET TAILASE BUCCAL OF TAISHO PHARMACEUTICAL CO.  PAROTIN, WHICH HAD BEEN SAID TO BE EFFECTIVE IN TREATING GASTROPTOSIS, MYASTHENIC SYNDROME AND SENILE CATARACTS, WAS PROVED TO BE INEFFECTIVE FOR THESE DISEASES. TEIKOKU HORMONE VOLUNTARILY HALTED PRODUCTION AND SALES OF THE DRUG IN APRIL 1989.  TAILASE BUCCAL HAS ALSO BEEN JUDGED INEFFECTIVE IN TREATING GINGIVITIS AND PYORRHEA. TAISHO WILL HAVE TO RECALL THE DRUG FROM THE MARKET WITHIN ONE MONTH FOLLOWING THE TERMINATION OF PRODUCTION.

 

End of Document


Workers say drug-maker ignored warning
United Press International
September 15, 1994, Thursday, BC cycle

 Copyright 1994 U.P.I.
Section: Domestic News
Length: 312 words
Dateline: BOSTON, Sept. 15
Body




Two former workers say Copley Pharmaceutical Inc. ignored their warnings it was violating federal regulations in the production of the over-the-counter antihistamine drug Brompheril, the Boston Globe reported Thursday.  The Canton-Mass.
-based company Wednesday recalled the drug, but only after a federal grand jury subpoenaed documents on the firm's production methods.  Copley cited ''a lack of assurance'' that the coating process met U. S. Food and Drug Administration regulations, but said there were no safety concerns.  Copley issued the recall -- its second this year -- after receiving a federal subpoena demanding documents related to the Brompheril production process.  The FDA investigation reportedly is based on information provided by former workers who were responsible for the production process.  Michael Riley of Quincy and Kevin Madden of South Boston worked on the drug in Copley's South Boston facility. They told the Globe they had informed company officials that the coatings were not made to FDA specifications, and that the company violated a rule by having just one employee working alone on the production when FDA regulations required two.  ''I told them what I was doing and that I need some help, but they kept putting it off,'' Riley said. ''All they wanted was production, get it out, get it out,'' he told the Globe.  Madden later joined him in production, but they said despite repeatedly informing the company about their concerns over the coating process, the company refused to alter the production process.  Riley subsequently refused to sign off on any more production sheets, received job threats from supervisors, quit and went to the FDA, the Globe said.  In January Copley recalled its Albuterol Sulfate inhalation solution, setting off an FDA investigation into production problems and prompting more than 50 lawsuits from users.
 Load-Date: September 22, 1994

 

End of Document


Doxycycline Recalled
The Associated Press
February 15, 1990, Thursday, AM cycle

 Copyright 1990 Associated Press  All Rights Reserved
Section: Business News
Length: 285 words
Dateline: WASHINGTON
Body




More than 3,000 bottles of an antibiotic distributed by Goldline Laboratories, doxycycline hyclate, are being recalled because one bottle was found to contain a muscle relaxant, federal officials said Thursday.
Doxycycline hyclate is used to treat a wide range of infections, including venereal diseases, acne and life-threatening pneumonia.
The Food and Drug Administration said the mislabeled muscle relaxant, carisoprodol, could harm patients because it would not treat their infections and could impair their mental and physical abilities, making it dangerous to drive a car or operate heavy machinery.
The recalled bottles of Goldline doxycycline hyclate 100 milligrams are in six lots. The bottles carry lot numbers 824039, 844059, 863069, 882079, 883079 and 919099.
The carisoprodol tablets are white and round with the Bolar Pharmaceutical Co. Inc. logo on one side - a "b" over an inverted "b" - and the number 0094 stamped on the other side.
The FDA said patients who find that they have the mislabeled product should stop using it, contact their physicians and return the prescription to their pharmacy.
The distributor, Goldline Laboratories, discovered the mislabeled antibiotic and notified Bolar, the supplier, which is voluntarily recalling the drug, according to the FDA.
Bolar said more than 3,000 bottles may be in the hands of pharmacists or consumers.
The Copiague, N.Y.-based Bolar has been under fire for giving false test data to the government. It has recalled many of its products, including its largest seller, a generic version of the anti-hypertensive drug Dyzaide.
FDA spokesman Jeff Nesbit said the doxycycline recall did not appear to be linked to Bolar's other problems with the agency.

 

End of Document


AM-Atlantic-Today, ; hqq; HALIFAX OUT; UNDATED - 416 . . . Society.; Dartmouth water rates set to rise
The Canadian Press (CP)
March 8, 1995 Wednesday

 Copyright 1995 Press News Limited, All Rights Reserved
Section: ATLANTIC REGIONAL GENERAL NEWS
Length: 417 words
Dateline: DARTMOUTH, N.S.
Body



DARTMOUTH, N.S. (CP) - Water rates will increase by anywhere from 50 to 100 per cent to build a new $34-million water-purification plant, says water utility head Bruce Hetherington.
"There are many different scenarios,'' said Hetherington, who is also an alderman. "But it's a foregone conclusion. We . . . have to pay for the plant and the only way you can pay for a plant . . . is through user pay.''
By mid-month, the city expects to call for expressions of interest for construction of the 70-million-litre-a-day plant. Last summer, Dartmouth residents had to boil water for a month after coliform bacteria was found in the city's water system.
Dartmouth residents pay $1.20 for every 1,000 gallons of water, which works out to about $10 a month for an average household. The last water rate increase was in 1977.
---
Forrayi convicted of first-degree murder
HALIFAX (CP) - A Halifax man was convicted of first-degree murder in the stabbing death of a fisheries observer Wednesday and sentenced to life in prison without chance of parole for 25 years.
Bradley Forrayi collapsed into his chair after the sentence was imposed by Justice Gordon Tidman. Under the Criminal Code he can apply for review of parole eligibility after 15 years.
Prosecutors said that in August 1993, Forrayi broke into the home of Michael Cassidy, 43, while the man slept, stabbing him and setting his body on fire. When the victim fought for his life, Forrayi attacked him again, then looted his apartment for anything he could sell to get money for drugs.
Forrayi claimed that his former friend, ex-boxer Paul Talbot, killed Cassidy.
---
Drug recall causes shortage
HALIFAX (CP) - A worldwide recall of an antibody drug has caused a temporary shortage in Nova Scotia, says the province's chief medical officer.
The product, an immunoglobulin, was voluntarily recalled last week by manufacturer Miles Canada Inc., said Dr. Jeff Scott.
"That has left us in a temporary situation of a shortage of certain immunoglobulins,'' said Scott.
He said there is nothing wrong with the products - manufactured from human blood - but the Toronto-based pharmaceutical maker is now using a new testing procedure that makes them even safer.
The drug is prescribed for people who have been exposed to rabies and who have not been immunized against tetanus, and for people visiting foreign countries where hepatitis A is common. Children who don't have enough of their own antibodies to protect them against disease are also given the product, said Scott.
---
 Load-Date: October 13, 2002

 

End of Document
