
User Name: = 
Date and Time: = 2024-12-01
Job Number: = 239784912

Documents (200)
Client/Matter: -None-
Search Terms: drug recall
Search Type: NaturalAnd
Content Type
Narrowed by
news
Industry: Pharmaceuticals & Biotechnology Geography News: North America Timeline: 01 Jan, 2010 to 31 Dec, 2019 

1. Lupin , Heritage recall drugs in US

2. Lupin , Heritage recall drugs in US

3. Health Ministry returns recalled drug on market

4. Health Ministry returns recalled drug on market

5. Aurobindo Pharma , Lupin recall drugs in US market

6. BARBADOS -HEALTH- Barbados recalls hypertensive drugs

7. Aurobindo recalls anaesthetic drug after hair found in vial

8. Drug company recalls heartburn drug Zantac globally for cancer scare

9. Drug company recalls heartburn drug Zantac globally for cancer scare

10. Zydus recalls hypertension drug in US

11. Vivimed recalls hypertension drug from US

12. Aurobindo recalls heartburn drug ranitidine, two others from US market

13. METFORMIN: REGULATORS RESPOND AFTER SINGAPORE HSA RECALLS DRUGS FOR NDMA IMPURITIES

14. Cyprus recalls heartburn drug, possible cancer link

15. Mylan Recalls Cancer Drug Over Particulate Matter Contamination

16. Heart drug recall expanded again

17. Heart drug recall expanded again

18. Aurobindo, DRL recall drugs

19. Aurobindo expands recall of drug for impurities from US

20. FDA Expands Blood Pressure Drugs Recall

21. FDA downplays risks from already recalled heartburn drug Zantac

22. FDA downplays risks from already recalled heartburn drug Zantac

23. FDA downplays risks from already recalled heartburn drug Zantac

24. Recall of blood pressure drug losartan expanded

25. Recall of blood pressure drug losartan expanded

26. FDA downplays risks from already recalled heartburn drug Zantac

27. Blood Pressure Drugs Recalled Over Cancer-Causing Components

28. Cadila recalls drug in US

29. Mylan and Hospira both recall injected drugs after particulate discovered in vials

30. Mylan and Hospira both recall injected drugs after particulate discovered in vials

31. Mylan and Hospira both recall injected drugs after particulate discovered in vials

32. Carcinogenic chemical concerns spur drug recall

33. Jubilant Recalls Drug from US Mkt

34. Dr Reddy's recalls heartburn drug Ranitidine from US market

35. Recall of blood pressure drug losartan expanded

36. Recall of blood pressure drug losartan expanded

37. Takeda recalls eye drug Natpara but warns patients not to abruptly stop treatment

38. Recall of blood pressure drug losartan expanded

39. Jubilant Recalls Drug from US Mkt

40. Trio recall drugs in US

41. Tylenol manufacturer recalls drugs

42. FDA EXPLAINS LEVELS OF IMPURITY FOUND IN RECALLED HEARTBURN DRUGS

43. GlaxoSmithKline recalls drug made in Nebraska

44. Lupin , Cadila Healthcare recall drugs in US

45. Class 1 recall for pediatric drug pumps

46. Takeda recalls eye drug Natpara but warns patients not to abruptly stop treatment

47. PHARMACY RECALLS DRUGS

48. Vivimed recalls hypertensive drug from US market due to impurities

49. Heartburn drug recalled over cancer fears

50. FDA To Propose Mandatory Recall Authority For Drug-Like Supplements

51. FDA eyeing immediate hypertension drug recall

52. FDA To Propose Mandatory Recall Authority For Drug-Like Supplements

53. A flurry of drug recalls hits Indian pharma firms in US

54. Torrent Pharma Expands Recall Of BP Drug Losartan For Cancer Risk

55. FDA eyeing immediate hypertension drug recall

56. Pfizer recalls drug from US

57. Torrent Pharma Expands Recall Of BP Drug Losartan For Cancer Risk

58. DDA mulls recalling or banning Valsartan drugs

59. Lupin , Cadila Healthcare recall drugs in US

60. Mylan must recall drugs made by Endo

61. Torrent Pharma expands recall of hypertension drug in US

62. Making sense of the recent blood pressure drug recalls

63. Another recall involving blood pressure drugs announced

64. India : In America , Ranbaxy recalls drug

65. Jubilant Arm Recalls Drug from US Over 'Minor Discrepancies'

66. GOVERNOR CUOMO SIGNS LEGISLATION REQUIRING PHARMACIES TO NOTIFY PATIENTS OF CLASS I DRUG RECALLS WITHIN SEVEN DAYS

67. Dr Reddys, Cipla arm recall drugs in US market; includes 7.8 lakh vials of injection used to treat low testosterone levels in men

68. Pfizer Japan recalls high blood pressure drug over cancer-causing impurity

69. Affymax , Takeda Recall Anemia Drug

70. Sun , Wockhardt recall drugs from US market

71. Three companies recall antipsychotic drug quetiapine: Health Canada says Three companies recall antipsychotic drug

72. Baxter recalls blood drug

73. Recalled drug may treat cancer

74. India : Dr Reddy's recalls drug

75. Zydus 's US arm recalls drug

76. CONTAMINATION POTENTIAL LEADS UK TO FIFTH RECALL OF RANITIDINE DRUGS

77. Torrent Expands and Prinston Pharmaceutical Initiates Recall of "Sartan" Drugs

78. Merck recalls cholesterol drug Liptruzet

79. POSSIBLE CANCER RISK - Pharma Dynamics to recall drug amid review

80. POSSIBLE CANCER RISK - Pharma Dynamics to recall drug amid review

81. POSSIBLE CANCER RISK - Pharma Dynamics to recall drug amid review

82. POSSIBLE CANCER RISK - Pharma Dynamics to recall drug amid review

83. Recalling drugs a tough call

84. FDA finds more impurity in recalled heart drug

85. European regulator launches review of recalled heart drug

86. Reddy's recalls drug in US on labelling errors

87. FDA flagged factories before medication recalls Carcinogens found in drugs from China, India

88. New York Gov. Cuomo Signs Legislation Requiring Pharmacies to Notify Patients of Class I Drug Recalls Within Seven Days

89. DRL recalls hypertension drug from US market

90. India : In the US , Ranbaxy recalls drug

91. Takeda Issues US Recall of Thyroid Drug Natpara Due to Particulates from Cartridge

92. Tylenol makers recall Fiji drug

93. Sun Pharma, Wockhardt recall drugs from US market

94. Blood pressure drug recall expands over third possible carcinogen

95. UPDATED: Sun recalls drug used for treating brain bleeding

96. Two more I.F. clinics received recalled drugs

97. AUSTRALIA RECALL - Aspen writes down R719m on drug recall

98. United States : Governor Cuomo Signs Legislation Requiring Pharmacies to Notify Patients of Class I Drug Recalls Within Seven Days

99. Sun Pharma, Wockhardt recall drugs from US market

100. Aurobindo Pharma, Cadila recall drugs from US market

101. Dems: FDA should be able to recall drugs

102. AUSTRALIA RECALL - Aspen writes down R719m on drug recall

103. Heartburn drug recalled, removed from shelves over cancer concerns

104. AUSTRALIA RECALL - Aspen writes down R719m on drug recall

105. Zydus ' US arms recalls drug in US

106. Sagent recalls drug because of leaking bags

107. Aurobindo Pharma , Cadila recall drugs from US market

108. LAWMAKERS SEEK CLARITY FROM FDA ON RECALL OF LIFESAVING DRUG

109. Hospira recalls drug because of storage glitch during shipping

110. Drug pump recall issued

111. FDA expands recall of blood pressure drugs again

112. Sun Pharma recalls antidepressant drug from US

113. Johnson & Johnson : Recalled drugs delayed again

114. FDA finds another impurity in recalled heart drug

115. Sun Pharma recalls osteoporosis drugs

116. FDA recalls valsartan drug products after impurity detection

117. FDA Requests Recall of Sterile Compounded Drug Products Produced by AmEx Pharmacy

118. ORPHAN DRUG RECALL LEAVES PATIENTS IN THE LURCH

119. FDA finds another impurity in recalled heart drug

120. FDA again expands recall for blood pressure drug losartan

121. Emcure injected schizophrenia drug recalled after contamination detected

122. FDA recalls valsartan drug products after impurity detection

123. Merck Recalls Cholesterol Drug Liptruzet

124. Sanofi recalls popular heartburn drug Zantac as FDA investigates probable carcinogen

125. COMMON HEARTBURN DRUG RECALLED OVER CANCER LINKS

126. FDA again expands recall for blood pressure drug losartan

127. Common heartburn drug recalled over cancer links

128. FDA reversal: Keep taking recalled cholesterol drug

129. Health Canada warns of critical shortage of recalled drug

130. Sun Pharma recalls antidepressant drug from US market

131. Popular heartburn drugs are being recalled over cancer worries

132. FDA expands drug recall

133. Hospira Recalls Cancer Drug After Finding Carboplatin Crystals

134. Aurobindo recalls hypertension drug in US, cites cancer risk

135. Emcure injected schizophrenia drug recalled after contamination detected

136. Drug recall Moses Lake Professional Pharmacy issues drug recall

137. Bedford Labs recalls cancer drug cytarabine

138. Popular heartburn drugs are being recalled over cancer worries

139. Deaths tied to recalled drugs from Texas compounder

140. Popular heartburn drugs are being recalled over cancer worries

141. The FDA expands recall of blood pressure drugs again

142. The FDA expands recall of blood pressure drugs again

143. DRL continues recall of anti-epilepsy drug from US

144. Blood Pressure Drugs Recall: What To Do If Your Prescription Meds Are Affected

145. Wockhardt to recall drugs made in India after US FDA quality concerns

146. Popular heartburn drugs are being recalled over cancer worries

147. Popular heartburn drugs are being recalled over cancer worries

148. Popular heartburn drugs are being recalled over cancer worries

149. European regulator launches review of recalled heart drug

150. 2 Texas patients who received recalled drug die

151. FDA REQUESTS RECALL OF STERILE COMPOUNDED DRUG PRODUCTS PRODUCED BY PACIFICO NATIONAL INC

152. USFDA Raps Sun for Laxity in Follow-up for Recalled Drugs

153. Drug maker expands recall for infant ibuprofen over dosage concern

154. GSK recalls popular heartburn drug Zantac globally after cancer scare

155. Bono Mack slams FDA for failing to recall drugs

156. European regulator launches review of recalled heart drug

157. Bono Mack slams FDA for failing to recall drugs

158. Mylan recalls Bengaluru unit cancer drug US company recalling two drugs manufactured by Agila Onco, which it bought from Strides Arcolab two years back

159. Another compounder recalls drugs because of lapse in outside testing

160. Fla. compounding pharmacy recalls sterile drugs

161. Stop taking recalled cholesterol drug, FDA advises

162. Fla. compounding pharmacy recalls sterile drugs

163. Fla. compounding pharmacy recalls sterile drugs

164. 3 versions of diabetes drug metformin recalled

165. Fla. compounding pharmacy recalls sterile drugs

166. Emcure knocked by the FDA for sterility issues after injectable drug recall

167. BLOG: MedBeat: LewisGale contacts 45 heart patients about recalled drugs

168. 500-plus patients received recalled drug in Va.

169. DRL to continue recall of anti-epilepsy drug from US

170. Popular heartburn drugs are being recalled over cancer worries

171. Empty capsules force Aurobindo drug recall Firm joins long list of Indian pharma companies that have recalled drugs in the US market since January

172. Wockhardt recalls some drugs from US market

173. European Medicines Agency launches review of recalled heart drug

174. Recalled, drug-tainted supplements still available for purchase.

175. Drug recalls surge

176. Counter drug recall

177. Hypertension drugs recalled in many countries still being sold in Nepal

178. B.C. man recalls heavy drug use before pregnant girlfriend found dead Man recalls drug use before girlfriend found dead

179. Compounding pharmacy recalls eye drugs and more

180. Bedford Recalls Overdose Drug After Discovered Glass Particles

181. Drug recalls raise questions for blood pressure control The People's Pharmacy: Drug recalls lead to poor blood pressure control

182. ANOTHER batch of blood pressure drugs recalled over traces of cancer-causing chemical used in ROCKET FUEL

183. Drug recalls raise questions for blood pressure control The People's Pharmacy: Drug recalls lead to poor blood pressure control

184. Sandoz Recalls Bottles Of Prescription Drugs Over Children's Safety

185. Sagent announces drug recall

186. Drug recalls raise questions for blood pressure control The People's Pharmacy: Drug recalls lead to poor blood pressure control

187. GIVE FDA MUSCLE TO RECALL BAD DRUGS

188. Bedford Labs recalling cancer drug cytarabine

189. Pills recalled by drug maker

190. USFDA Raps Sun Pharma for Laxity in Follow-up for Recalled Drugs

191. UK regulator recalls 16 Wockhardt drugs

192. California -based company recalls anemia drugs

193. California -based company recalls anemia drugs

194. Recalled blood pressure drugs pose very low cancer risk

195. -FDA requests recall of sterile compounded drug products produced by Pacifico National Inc. , dba AmEx Pharmacy

196. Recent drug recalls worry investors

197. FDA expands recall of blood pressure drug

198. Israeli Drugmaker Teva Recalls Four Drugs Manufactured in Hungary

199. Drug recalls are more widespread than previously thought

200. Europe issues 2nd recall of drugs made by Ben Venue




Lupin, Heritage recall drugs in US
Medical Buyer
July 17, 2019

 Copyright 2019 Medical Buyer, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 240 words
Body




Lupin has initiated a nationwide voluntary recall of pneumonia antibiotic in the US after a complaint of metal piece in the bottle was received. In a recent enforcement report, the US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) said Lupin Pharmaceuticals Inc., the US arm of Mumbai-based Lupin, has recalled 18,408 bottles of Cefdinir, 250mg/5ml powder for oral suspension in 60-ml bottle manufactured at Lupin's Mandideep plant in Madhya Pradesh. Cefdinir is an antibiotic used to treat pneumonia, otitis media, strep throat, and cellulitis.
The reason for the recall is given as a complaint received of metal piece identified in the product bottle prior to the reconstitution. The ongoing Class-II recall was initiated on May 23. The products have an expiry date of November 2020.
The company also initiated a voluntary recall of Amikacin Sulfate Injection, 1g/4ml, with an expiry of October 2019, and Prochlorperazine Edisylate Injection, 10 mg/2ml, with an expiry of April 2020. These drug products are manufactured by Emcure Pharmaceuticals and distributed by Heritage. The voluntary recall is being initiated due to microbial growth having been detected, which may indicate a lack of sterility in the other sub-lots. Non-sterile injectable products that are intended to be sterile may result in a site-specific or systemic infection, which may cause hospitalization or death. Heritage has not received adverse event reports related to this event.
 Load-Date: August 30, 2019

 

End of Document


Lupin, Heritage recall drugs in US
DNA
June 10, 2019 Monday

 Copyright 2019 Diligent Media Corporation Ltd., DNA (Daily News & Analysis), distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 397 words
Byline: DNA Money Correspondent
Body




Mumbai: Pharmaceutical firm Lupin has initiated a nationwide voluntary recall of pneumonia antibiotic in the US after a complaint of metal piece in the bottle was received.
In a recent enforcement report, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) said Lupin Pharmaceuticals Inc, the US arm of Mumbai-based Lupin, has recalled 18,408 bottles of Cefdinir, 250mg/5ml powder for oral suspension in 60 ml bottle manufactured at Lupin's Mandideep plant in Madhya Pradesh.
Cefdinir is an antibiotic used to treat pneumonia, otitis media, strep throat, and cellulitis.
The reason for the recall is given as complaint received of metal piece identified in the product bottle prior to the reconstitution.
The ongoing Class II recall was initiated on May 23, the FDA said on its website. The products have an expiry date of November 2020.
A Class II recall is a situation in which use of, or exposure to, a violative product may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences or where the probability of serious adverse health consequences is remote.
Another Class II recall specification was reported by Heritage Pharmaceutical Inc after it initiated a nationwide voluntary recall of 81,873 bottles of high blood pressure drug Losartan Potassium tablets in 25 mg, 50 mg, and 100 mg, with expiry between November 2019 and April 2020, after FDA lab confirmed presence of an impurity, N-Methylnitrosobutyric acid in the finished product above the interim acceptable daily intake level at the manufacturer.
The products were manufactured by Vivimed Life Sciences at its Kanchipuram plant. Losartan is also used for diabetic kidney disease, heart failure and left ventricular enlargement.
The pharma company also initiated a voluntary recall of Amikacin Sulfate Injection, 1g/4ml, with an expiry of October 2019, and Prochlorperazine Edisylate Injection, 10 mg/2ml, with an expiry of April 2020.
These drug products are manufactured by Emcure Pharmaceuticals and distributed by Heritage. The voluntary recall is being initiated due to microbial growth having been detected, which may indicate a lack of sterility in the other sub-lots.
Non-sterile injectable products that are intended to be sterile may result in a site-specific or systemic infection which may cause hospitalisation or death. Heritage has not received adverse event reports related to this event, the FDA notification said.
 Load-Date: June 10, 2019

 

End of Document


Health Ministry returns recalled drug on market
Egypt Independent
February 20, 2019 Wednesday

 Copyright 2019 Egypt Independent Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 300 words
Byline: Al-Masry Al-Youm
Body




Egypt's Health Ministry announced reinstating at pharmacies a previously recalled medication that contains the heart drug Valsartan. The drug was used for treating high blood pressure until the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) confirmed that it may lead to cancer, causing the Health Ministry to recall it from pharmacies.
The Health Ministry announced that the drug was safe for the treatment of high blood pressure and reinstated it on the Egyptian market.
The ministry issued Circular No. 7 of 2019 to re-circulate the drug that had been recalled for containing Valsartan, among other drugs, from pharmacies in Egypt, Europe and the US since July 2018.
The ministry said that the company that produces the drug imported new raw material that was analyzed by the National Organization for Drug Control and Research, affiliated to the Health Ministry, and confirmed that the raw material was safe and conformed with international standards.
In July 2018, the Central Department of Pharmaceutical Affairs of the Health Ministry recalled 14 Valsartan-containing medications, according to the Ministry of Health and Population.
The Health Ministry asked manufacturers of the drug to freeze their stocks of medicine from Egyptian markets and to withdraw all that had been distributed to the pharmacies.
"This recall is due to an impurity, N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), which was found in the recalled products. However, not all products containing Valsartan are being recalled," FDA says.
The NDMA is classified as a probable human carcinogen (a substance that could cause cancer) based on results from laboratory tests. The presence of NDMA was unexpected and is thought to be related to changes in the way the active substance was manufactured, according to the FDA.
Edited translation from Al-Masry Al-Youm
 Load-Date: February 20, 2019

 

End of Document


Health Ministry returns recalled drug on market
Pharma & Healthcare Monitor Worldwide
February 22, 2019 Friday

 Copyright 2019 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 297 words
Body




Egypts Health Ministry announced reinstating at pharmacies a previously recalled medication that contains the heart drug Valsartan. The drug was used for treating high blood pressure until the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) confirmed that it may lead to cancer, causing the Health Ministry to recall it from pharmacies.
The Health Ministry announced that the drug was safe for the treatment of high blood pressure and reinstated it on the Egyptian market.
The ministry issued Circular No. 7 of 2019 to re-circulate the drug that had been recalled for containing Valsartan, among other drugs, from pharmacies in Egypt, Europe and the US since July 2018.
The ministry said that the company that produces the drug imported new raw material that was analyzed by the National Organization for Drug Control and Research, affiliated to the Health Ministry, and confirmed that the raw material was safe and conformed with international standards.
In July 2018, the Central Department of Pharmaceutical Affairs of the Health Ministry recalled 14 Valsartan-containing medications, according to the Ministry of Health and Population.
The Health Ministry asked manufacturers of the drug to freeze their stocks of medicine from Egyptian markets and to withdraw all that had been distributed to the pharmacies.
This recall is due to an impurity, N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), which was found in the recalled products. However, not all products containing Valsartan are being recalled, FDA says.
The NDMA is classified as a probable human carcinogen (a substance that could cause cancer) based on results from laboratory tests. The presence of NDMA was unexpected and is thought to be related to changes in the way the active substance was manufactured, according to the FDA. 2019 Global Data Point.
 Load-Date: February 22, 2019

 

End of Document


Aurobindo Pharma, Lupin recall drugs in US market
Banking and Finance : Policy Changes
April 1, 2019 Monday

 Copyright 2019 Banking and Finance : Policy Changes All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 348 words
Dateline: April 04 
Body




 April 04 --  Drug major Aurobindo Pharma is recalling multiple lots of blood pressure lowering drugs in the US after the American health regulator found certain deviations from Current Good Manufacturing Practice (CGMP) regulations.
 Besides, Mumbai-based Lupin is also recalling 3,200 bottles of Testosterone Topical solution in the US for issues with the container. As per the latest Enforcement Report issued by the US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA), Aurobindo Pharma USA Inc is recalling the drug in various strengths due to "presence of trace amounts of an impurity, N-nitrosodiethylamine (NDEA) found in the active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) which used to manufacture the product."
 The company, which is a subsidiary of Hyderabad-based Aurobindo Pharma, has initiated a voluntary recall for some lots of Valsartan tablets in strengths of 320 mg, 80 mg, 160 mg in 90 count bottles and 40 mg tablets in 30 count bottles. It is also recalling certain lots of Amlodipine and Valsartan Tablets USP 10mg/160mg in 30 count bottles for CGMP deviations.
 Aurobindo has distributed the product to major distribution chains throughout the US, USFDA said.
 The US health regulator has classified the action as a Class-II recall, which is initiated in a "situation in which use of or exposure to a violative product may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences or where the probability of serious adverse health consequences is remote".
 Baltimore-based Lupin Pharmaceuticals Inc, a part of Lupin, is also recalling 3,200 bottles of Testosterone Topical Solution in the US.
 USFDA said repetitive complaints were received regarding the container indicating faulty pump.
 The product was distributed to seven major wholesale/drug chain distributors and one supermarket chain that may have further distributed the product throughout the US, USFDA said in its report.
 The US health regulator classified it as class III recall, which is initiated in a situation in which use of, or exposure to, a violative product is not likely to cause adverse health consequences.
 Load-Date: April 1, 2019

 

End of Document


BARBADOS-HEALTH-Barbados recalls hypertensive drugs
CANA News
January 7, 2019 Monday

 Copyright 2019 CANA News All Rights Reserved
Length: 244 words
Body




 Barbados health authorities have announced the withdrawal of the Citron branded Valsartan after tests conducted by the Trinidad-based Caribbean Public Health Agency (CARPHA).
The Ministry of Health and Wellness said that the recall of the Citron branded Valsartan, along with Indapamide, was due to the 'failure of both tablets to dissolve.
'This decision was made after testing was carried out by the Caribbean Public Health Agency (CARPHA) and is not related to the FDA (United States Food and Drug Administration) recall,' the Ministry of Health and Wellness said.
Acting Chief Medical Officer, Dr. Kenneth George said the authorities 'will continue to monitor the FDA drug recalls for all categories of drugs and will make all necessary decisions to protect the health of the Barbadian public'.
Earlier, the Ministry of Health and Wellness said it wanted to assure the public that none of the drugs identified in the December 31 recall of the hypertensive drug, Valsartan, by the FDA is approved by the Barbados Drug Service for sale in Barbados.
It said that the FDA recall is related to the discovery of an impurity believed to increase cancer risk. The branded products recalled are from a specific company and have been identified as Valsartan, Amlodipine-Valsartan and Valsartan hydrochlorothiazide tablets.
'The Ministry has made it clear that all brands approved for dispensing in Barbados are FDA-approved and also meet local standards,' the statement said.
 Load-Date: January 8, 2019

 

End of Document


Aurobindo recalls anaesthetic drug after hair found in vial
Times of India (Electronic Edition)
April 19, 2019 Friday
Hyderabad Edition

 Copyright 2019 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: TIMES BUSINESS
Length: 303 words
Byline: TIMES NEWS NETWORK
Body




City-based pharma major Aurobindo Pharma Ltd seems to be having 'bad hair days' with its US arm -- Aurobindo Pharma USA Inc -- recalling 88,600 vials of Lidocaine HCl injection USP 1 % 50 mg/5 mL (10 mg/mL) from the US market after a strand of hair was found in one of the drug's vials. Lidocaine HCl injection is a local anaesthetic.
As per information available on the United States Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) website, the company has cited the reason for drug recall as, “Presence of particulate matter: One vial was found to contain a hair".
The drug, belonging to lot number: CLC180117 and expiring on June 2021, has been manufactured in India for AuroMedics Pharna LLC. The voluntary drug recall by the company was initiated on March 28 this year.
“The product is being held at a distributor site in Mexico, Asheboro, NC, Charlotte, NC and Santa Teresa, NM and not further distributed in the US market,” the USFDA website said.
The drug recall has not yet been classified by the FDA. Generally, the drug recalls are classified under Class I, II or III, signifying varying degrees of risk posed by the drug being recalled by the firm.
On October 30, 2017, Aurobindo had received FDA approval for Lidocaine HCl injection multiple-dose vials. Till then AuroMedics was marketing the singledose vials.
In fact, over the past three months, Aurobindo Pharma has also recalled its generic blood pressure lowering drug from the US market following deviation from current good manufacturing practices prescribed by USFDA. Its US arm, Aurobindo Pharma USA Inc, recalled Amlodipine and Valsartan tablets after following FDA lab confirmed the presence of an impurity -- N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDEA) -- in the API used to manufacture the product above the interim acceptable daily intake level of 0.083 parts per million.
 Load-Date: April 19, 2019

 

End of Document


Drug company recalls heartburn drug Zantac globally for cancer scare
Postmedia Breaking News
October 9, 2019 Wednesday
Web Edition

 Copyright 2019 Postmedia Breaking News All Rights Reserved
Section: HEALTH AND WELLNESS
Length: 610 words
Body




GlaxoSmithKline on Tuesday said it is recalling the popular heartburn medicine Zantac in all markets as a "precaution," days after the U.S. Food and Drug Administration found "unacceptable" levels of probable cancer-causing impurity in the drug.
Zantac, also sold generically as ranitidine, is the latest drug in which cancer-causing impurities have been found. Regulators have been recalling some blood pressure and heart failure medicines since last year.
Britain's medicines watchdog said GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) was recalling four prescription-only Zantac medicines: a syrup, an injection and tablets of 150 and 300 milligram dosages.
Over-the-counter 75 mg dosage Zantac products are produced by a different company and are not affected by the recall, it added.
"GSK informed the MHRA of our decision to suspend the release, distribution and supply of all dose forms of Zantac products," a company spokesman confirmed to Reuters.
"GSK is continuing with investigations into the potential source of the NDMA," he said, adding that the investigations include continued engagement with its suppliers and with external laboratories to conduct tests on finished product batches of Zantac.
In this photo illustration, packages and pills of Zantac, a popular medication which decreases stomach acid production and prevents heartburn, sit on a table.
The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) said healthcare professionals were told on Monday to "stop supplying the products immediately, quarantine all remaining stock and return it to their supplier."
"We are advising that patients should not to stop taking their medication, and do not need to see their doctor until their next routine appointment but should seek their doctor's advice if they have any concerns," the MHRA said.
Global stoppage
U.S. and European health regulators said last month they were reviewing the safety of ranitidine, after online pharmacy Valisure flagged the impurities.
The FDA said Valisure's higher-temperature testing method generated very high levels of NDMA from the ranitidine drugs.
NDMA had previously been found in some blood pressure medicines from a class of drugs known as angiotensin II receptor blockers, or ARBs.
After checking the over-the-counter drugs using a low-heat method of testing, the FDA said it found much lower levels of NDMA than was discovered with a higher temperature test employed by Valisure.
The U.S. regulator has asked ranitidine makers to conduct their own testing to assess levels of the impurity and to send samples of their products for testing by the agency.
Swiss drugmaker Novartis halted global distribution of its ranitidine drugs last month.
Apricot Power brand apricot seeds recalled over potential cyanide poisoning( https://nationalpost.com/health/apricot-power-brand-apricot-seeds-recalled-over-fears-of-cyanide-poisoning )
Canadian drugmaker Apotex issues recall of generic Zantac in U.S. over carcinogen fears( https://business.financialpost.com/news/fp-street/canadian-drugmaker-apotex-issues-recall-of-generic-zantac-in-u-s-over-carcinogen-fears )
Last week, Walmart Inc joined pharmacy chains CVS Health Corp, Walgreens Boots Alliance Inc and Rite Aid Corp in suspending the sale of over-the-counter heartburn drugs containing ranitidine.
Canada's health authorities have asked makers of the drugs to halt distribution as they gather more information. Last month, regulators in Hong Kong pulled four products, while in Ireland 13 products containing ranitidine were recalled.
The impurity was believed to have been introduced by changes in the manufacturing process. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2019 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.
 Load-Date: October 9, 2019

 

End of Document


Drug company recalls heartburn drug Zantac globally for cancer scare
National Post (f/k/a The Financial Post) (Canada)
October 9, 2019 Wednesday
Web Edition

 Copyright 2019 National Post All Rights Reserved
Section: HEALTH AND WELLNESS
Length: 610 words
Body




GlaxoSmithKline on Tuesday said it is recalling the popular heartburn medicine Zantac in all markets as a "precaution," days after the U.S. Food and Drug Administration found "unacceptable" levels of probable cancer-causing impurity in the drug.
Zantac, also sold generically as ranitidine, is the latest drug in which cancer-causing impurities have been found. Regulators have been recalling some blood pressure and heart failure medicines since last year.
Britain's medicines watchdog said GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) was recalling four prescription-only Zantac medicines: a syrup, an injection and tablets of 150 and 300 milligram dosages.
Over-the-counter 75 mg dosage Zantac products are produced by a different company and are not affected by the recall, it added.
"GSK informed the MHRA of our decision to suspend the release, distribution and supply of all dose forms of Zantac products," a company spokesman confirmed to Reuters.
"GSK is continuing with investigations into the potential source of the NDMA," he said, adding that the investigations include continued engagement with its suppliers and with external laboratories to conduct tests on finished product batches of Zantac.
In this photo illustration, packages and pills of Zantac, a popular medication which decreases stomach acid production and prevents heartburn, sit on a table.
The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) said healthcare professionals were told on Monday to "stop supplying the products immediately, quarantine all remaining stock and return it to their supplier."
"We are advising that patients should not to stop taking their medication, and do not need to see their doctor until their next routine appointment but should seek their doctor's advice if they have any concerns," the MHRA said.
Global stoppage
U.S. and European health regulators said last month they were reviewing the safety of ranitidine, after online pharmacy Valisure flagged the impurities.
The FDA said Valisure's higher-temperature testing method generated very high levels of NDMA from the ranitidine drugs.
NDMA had previously been found in some blood pressure medicines from a class of drugs known as angiotensin II receptor blockers, or ARBs.
After checking the over-the-counter drugs using a low-heat method of testing, the FDA said it found much lower levels of NDMA than was discovered with a higher temperature test employed by Valisure.
The U.S. regulator has asked ranitidine makers to conduct their own testing to assess levels of the impurity and to send samples of their products for testing by the agency.
Swiss drugmaker Novartis halted global distribution of its ranitidine drugs last month.
Apricot Power brand apricot seeds recalled over potential cyanide poisoning( https://nationalpost.com/health/apricot-power-brand-apricot-seeds-recalled-over-fears-of-cyanide-poisoning )
Canadian drugmaker Apotex issues recall of generic Zantac in U.S. over carcinogen fears( https://business.financialpost.com/news/fp-street/canadian-drugmaker-apotex-issues-recall-of-generic-zantac-in-u-s-over-carcinogen-fears )
Last week, Walmart Inc joined pharmacy chains CVS Health Corp, Walgreens Boots Alliance Inc and Rite Aid Corp in suspending the sale of over-the-counter heartburn drugs containing ranitidine.
Canada's health authorities have asked makers of the drugs to halt distribution as they gather more information. Last month, regulators in Hong Kong pulled four products, while in Ireland 13 products containing ranitidine were recalled.
The impurity was believed to have been introduced by changes in the manufacturing process. !@COPYRIGHT=© 2019 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.
 Load-Date: January 29, 2020

 

End of Document


Zydus recalls hypertension drug in US
DNA
May 30, 2019 Thursday

 Copyright 2019 Diligent Media Corporation Ltd., DNA (Daily News & Analysis), distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 390 words
Byline: DNA Money Correspondent
Body




Zydus Pharmaceuticals USA Inc has initiated a nationwide voluntary recall of acyclovir and carvedilol tablets in the US for labelling mix-up.
The US arm of the Gujarat-based company Cadila Healthcare has recalled 3,900 bottles of hypertension drug carvedilol tablets, 6.25 mg, in 500 count bottles, after a report was received of one bottle labelled as acyclovir tablets, 400 mg, actually contained carvedilol tablets 6.25 mg.
The recall is included in a recent US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Enforcement Report.
Acyclovir is a prescription antiviral used to treat cold sores, shingles, chickenpox and other herpes infections. Carvedilol is a prescription beta-blocker used to treat high blood pressure and heart failure.
The recall affects 100-count bottles of 400-mg acyclovir tablets manufactured by Cadila Healthcare with an expiry of November 30, 2020. The bottles were distributed throughout the United States by Zydus Pharmaceuticals.
The company has voluntarily initiated the recall on April 25. On May 7, the FDA designated the recall as Class II, where use of the drug may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences or a remote possibility of serious harm.
Earlier this month, Zydus recalled 7,668 bottles of carvedilol tablets after "presence of foreign tablets/capsules" was reported.
"Customer complaint for a small, solid, light yellow substance, identified as a fragmented tablet of another drug product, found mixed with tablets in a bottle of carvedilol tablets 3.125mg," the US FDA said. The recall was classified as Class III in which use of or exposure to a violative product is not likely to cause adverse health consequences.
The ongoing recalls by the Indian pharma companies in the US are happening in the midst of a book published on how generic drugs are poisoning patients.
In the book "Bottle of Lies: The Inside Story of Generic Drug Boom" on how generic drugs are manufactured and why they weren't as effective as patented drugs.
Brokerage firm India Infoline said that despite the book being on the Amazon US bestseller list (new releases) during the past week, the generic industry has a strong advocate in the FDA.
Quick reaction
It's a class II recall where use of the drug may cause temporary health consequences
Earlier, Zydus recalled carvedilol tablets after presence of foreign tablets
 Load-Date: May 30, 2019

 

End of Document


Vivimed recalls hypertension drug from US
Times of India (Electronic Edition)
May 8, 2019 Wednesday
Hyderabad Edition

 Copyright 2019 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: TIMES BUSINESS
Length: 266 words
Byline: TIMES NEWS NETWORK
Body




City-based pharma player Vivimed Life Sciences Pvt Ltd has recalled 19 lots of Losartan Potassium Tablets (USP 25 mg, 50 mg, and 100 mg), which is used in treating hypertension, due to detection of impurity which can cause cancer, the United States Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) said.
“Due to the detection of an impurity – N-Nitroso-N-methyl-4-aminobutyric acid (NMBA) – that is above the USFDA's interim acceptable exposure limit of 9.82 ppm. Based on the available information, the risk of developing cancer in a few patients following long-term use of the product containing high levels of the impurity NMBA cannot be ruled out,” the FDA site noted.
The drug has been manufactured by Vivimed at its plant in Alathur, Chennai, and distributed by Heritage Pharmaceuticals Inc, East Brunswick NJ (Heritage). Losartan Potassium is indicated for the treatment of hypertension, hypertensive patients with left ventricular hypertrophy, nephropathy in Type 2 diabetic patients and is packaged in 90-count and 1000-count bottles.
“Consumers should contact their doctor for further guidance and potential change of treatment before they stop taking the product. Pharmacies and healthcare facilities that have the product being recalled from above listed lots should stop using and dispensing the product immediately. Consumers should contact their physician or healthcare provider if they have experienced any problems that may be related to taking or using this drug product,” FDA said.
Till date, neither Vivimed nor Heritage has received any reports of adverse events related to this recall, it added.
 Load-Date: May 8, 2019

 

End of Document


Aurobindo recalls heartburn drug ranitidine, two others from US market
Pharma & Healthcare Monitor Worldwide
December 9, 2019 Monday

 Copyright 2019 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 368 words
Body




Aurobindo Pharma Limited has initiated a nationwide recall of three drugs from the US, two of them due to manufacturing issues. The development comes close on the heels of the regulatory compliance issues being faced by several of its manufacturing facilities back home.
These three products include heartburn drug Ranitidine that the US Food and Drug Administration(US FDA) had recently asked the companies to withdraw from the market owing to the presence of carcinogenic nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) compound above the daily acceptable intake limits in the formulation.
The recall of ranitidine was in different dosages of tablets and capsules of 30-500 count bottles, totalling 276,048 bottles besides 19,320 bottles of Ranitidine syrup, according the FDA.
The company has also initiated a voluntary recall of 197,000 vials of Amiodarone Hydrochloride injection, which is used in treating irregular heartbeat in patients, and 112,00 vials of local anesthetic Lidocaine HCL injection belonging to specific batches. All three drugs were distributed by Aurobindo Pharma's US subsidiary AuroMedics Pharma LLC. Aurobindo started recalling the formulations in the first and the second weeks of November.
The action on Ranitidine and Lidocaine, defined as a Class-II recall, was taken due to the presence of foreign and potentially harmful material in the drug that could cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences. In the case of Amiodarone, the company has initiated a class III recall after the visible presence of particulate matter in the vials due to crystallisation, though the product is unlikely to have any adverse health impact.
In April, the US FDA said it had asked the companies to recall the heartburn drug from the market as the formulation was found to contain carcinogenic material. Last month, several companies including Dr Reddy's and GSK had recalled their Ranitidine generics from the US market.
In recent times the generic drug firms had to face two industry-level recalls, the first involving the blood pressure-lowering drug sartans, followed by ranitidine, due to the presence of carcinogens in the active ingredients of the respective medicines. 2019 Global Data Point.
 Load-Date: December 9, 2019

 

End of Document


METFORMIN: REGULATORS RESPOND AFTER SINGAPORE HSA RECALLS DRUGS FOR NDMA IMPURITIES
States News Service
December 6, 2019 Friday

 Copyright 2019 States News Service
Length: 330 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: ROCKVILLE, MD 
Body




The following information was released by the Regulatory Affairs Professionals Society:
By Michael Mezher
Regulators including the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), European Medicines Agency (EMA), Health Canada and the UKs Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) are looking into whether formulations of the diabetes drug metformin contain N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) impurities.
The announcements come after Singapores Health Sciences Authority (HSA) on Wednesday recalled three out of 46 locally marketed metformin medicines after determining they contained NDMA above the internationally acceptable level. The three drugs were marketed by Singapore-based Glorious Dexa Singapore and Pharmazen Medicals Pte Ltd.
According to HSA, the risk posed by three medicines is low as they have only been supplied locally for a short period of time since last year.
The recall follows the discovery of nitrosamine impurities in angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB) drugs in 2018 and in the heartburn drug ranitidine earlier this year.
In statements from FDA, EMA, Health Canada and MHRA on Thursday and Friday, the agencies said there is no evidence that any metformin medicines distributed in their respective jurisdictions are affected and advised patients to continue taking their medicine as prescribed.
In a statement, FDAs Center for Drug Evaluation and Research Director Janet Woodcock said the agency will work with companies to test samples of metformin sold in the US and will recommend recalls as appropriate if high levels of NDMA are found, and noted that the levels of NDMA in metformin observed in other countries are within the range that is naturally occurring in some foods and water.
In its statement, EMA said that EU authorities are working with drugmakers to test medicines distributed in the EU. Meanwhile, Health Canada said it is asking drugmakers to test their metformin products and is collecting samples from companies to conduct its own testing.
 Load-Date: December 7, 2019

 

End of Document


Cyprus recalls heartburn drug, possible cancer link
Cyprus Mail
September 20, 2019 Friday

 Copyright 2019 Neo Cymed Publishing Limited All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 449 words
Body




The pharmaceutical services on Friday recalled every medication containing ranitidine as a precautionary measure over concern of its link to cancer.
The detection of low levels of a probable carcinogen called NDMA in ranitidine was announced by the US watchdog FDA last week.
Tests on animals showed that a particular substance, NDMA, had possible links to cancer.
Ranitidine is used to block stomach acid, and is commonly taken for heartburn.
The products available in Cyprus that contain ranitidine were Zantac tablets, Zantac injection, Ranitidine Accord tablets, Lumaren tablets, Lumaren injection and Verlost oral solution.
The decision to stop its distribution is precautionary until the European Medicines agency determines the drug’s safety, the authorities said.
Patients who regularly take the medicine should seek the advice of their doctor or their pharmacist for alternative medication.
U.S. and European drug regulators last week said they were reviewing the safety of ranitidineafter they found traces of a probable cancer-causing impurity in some versions of the medicine.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration said it had found traces of the impurity, called N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), in some of drugs with ranitidine in them.
The impurity in ranitidine was first flagged to the regulators by Valisure, an online pharmacy that tests the medication it sells for flaws.
Valisure said in its report that it found the impurity in both Sanofi SA’s brandedZantacas well as generic versions of the drug, Reuters reported. But the FDA would not confirm in which versions of the drug it had found the impurity, noting that it found quite different – and lower – amounts of NDMA in the drugs.
David Light, Valisure’s chief executive officer, said his company believes that because ranitidine is unstable, the impurity can form on its own, rather than being introduced by problems in the manufacturing process. He said its possible that the impurity has been in the drug for as long as it has been on the market.
“It seems to be that there’s an inherent problem with the drug itself,” Light said in an interview. “There’s a lot of concerns that, in our mind, justify completely recalling this product.”
The FDA said it has not determined how long the impurity has been present inZantac.
NDMA is one of the impurities that has been found in blood pressure and heart failure medicines called Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers (ARBs). Those impurities are believed to have been introduced by recent changes in the manufacturing processes for ARBs.
Regulators have been recalling those drugs since last year, and the FDA expanded its investigation of the impurities beyond that class of drugs last month.
 Load-Date: September 21, 2019

 

End of Document


Mylan Recalls Cancer Drug Over Particulate Matter Contamination
USNEWS.com
March 19, 2019 Tuesday

 Copyright 2019 U.S. News & World Report All Rights Reserved
Section: CIVIC; Health News; Vol.; No.
Length: 243 words
Byline: Alexa Lardieri
Highlight: The company discovered the drug was contaminated with copper salts during a 12-month test.
Body




Drugmaker Mylan issued a voluntary recall of two lots of a cancer drug over concerns they may be contaminated with particulate matter. 
During a yearlong stability test, copper salts were discovered in two lots of Levoleucovorin Injection, a drug used in cancer treatments, the Food and Drug Administration said. 
SEE: [The Week in Cartoons for March 18-22]
Intravenous administration of the drug containing copper salts can result in things like allergic reactions, microvascular obstruction, pulmonary embolism and vein and blood vessel inflammation. 
According to the FDA, Mylan has not received any reports of adverse reactions relating to the recall. 
The recalled lots were manufactured by Alidac Pharmaceuticals Limited and include Levoleucovorin Injection, 250 mg/25 mL with an expiration date of April 2019 and lot numbers APB032 and APB033. 
Mylan has notified its distributors and customers and is arranging for the return of affected products. The company advised wholesalers and retailers to quarantine and discontinue distribution of the affected lots and to contact customers who have already purchased the contaminated drug and notify them of the recall. 
Mylan told consumers who have bought the drug were directed to contact Stericycle for information on how to properly return the product. 
Alexa Lardieri is a reporter and digital producer at U.S. News & World Report. You can follow her on            Twitter and email her at alardieri@usnews.com
 Graphic



 
Picture, Intravenous administration of the drug containing copper salts can result in severe health consequences, such as allergic reactions and vein and blood vessel inflammation., (Darren Mower/Getty Images)
 Load-Date: March 20, 2019

 

End of Document


Heart drug recall expanded again
CNN.com
January 4, 2019 Friday 11:32 AM EST

 Copyright 2019 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved
 
Section: HEALTH
Length: 447 words
Byline: By Jen Christensen, CNN
Body




The recall of popular heart drugs has expanded yet again.
The US Food and Drug Administration said Thursday that Torrent Pharmaceuticals has added eight additional lots of losartan potassium tablets to its recall list. Losartan potassium is a drug used to control high blood pressure. It is also used to treat kidney disease in patients with diabetes.
This recall includes 30-, 90- and 1,000-count bottles of 100-milligram tablets; 30-, 90- and 1,000-count bottles of 50-milligram tablets; and 90-count bottles of 25-milligram tablets. Torrent is recalling only these particular losartan potassium tablets. Tests found that the drugs contained trace amounts of N-nitrosodiethylamine, or NDEA, that were above the interim acceptable intake level.
Aurobindo Pharma USA also recalled two lots of its valsartan tablets, 26 lots of amlodipine and valsartan combination tablets, and 52 lots of valsartan and hydrochlorothiazide combination tablets due to trace amounts of NDEA found in the valsartan ingredient in those pills. Those drugs are used to control high blood pressure and to treat heart failure.
N-nitrosodiethylamine is a suspected human and animal carcinogen that is used in gasoline and as a lubricant additive, according to the National Institutes of Health.
The ingredient in the tainted losartan potassium pills was made by Hetero Labs Ltd., based in India. That company has had manufacturing problems; it received a warning letter from the FDA in 2017 after an inspection found significant violations of good manufacturing practice regulations for finished pharmaceuticals.
The FDA started additional tests of these heart drugs, angiotensin II receptor blockers or ARBs, this summer after labs found that NDEA and another cancer-causing contaminant, NDMA, was accidentally added to some of these drugs.
The contaminants first showed up in drugs that contained valsartan, but subsequent tests have found them in others made by a Chinese company, Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., and by Hetero Labs Ltd.
The FDA continues to test the ingredient for cancer-causing chemicals. It also keeps a list of drugs that have been recalled and a list of drugs that have not been recalled. The recalls have been expanded several times since the initial recall over the summer.
If your drug is on the recall list, the FDA suggests that you countinue taking it until your doctor or pharmacist provides a replacement. Because not all valsartan, losartan potassium and irbesartan drugs are involved in the recall, you might be able to switch to another company's version.
It's unclear exactly what the cancer risk is if you take the contaminated pills; the FDA believes that the risk is low.
 Load-Date: January 5, 2019

 

End of Document


Heart drug recall expanded again
CNN Wire
January 4, 2019 Friday 4:32 PM GMT

 Copyright 2019 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved
Length: 463 words
Byline: By Jen Christensen, CNN
Dateline: (CNN) 
Body




 (CNN) --  The recall of popular heart drugs has expanded yet again. 
The US Food and Drug Administration said Thursday that Torrent Pharmaceuticals has added eight additional lots of losartan potassium tablets to its recall list. Losartan potassium is a drug used to control high blood pressure. It is also used to treat kidney disease in patients with diabetes. 
This recall includes 30-, 90- and 1,000-count bottles of 100-milligram tablets; 30-, 90- and 1,000-count bottles of 50-milligram tablets; and 90-count bottles of 25-milligram tablets. Torrent is recalling only these particular losartan potassium tablets. Tests found that the drugs contained trace amounts of N-nitrosodiethylamine, or NDEA, that were above the interim acceptable intake level. 
Aurobindo Pharma USA also recalled two lots of its valsartan tablets, 26 lots of amlodipine and valsartan combination tablets, and 52 lots of valsartan and hydrochlorothiazide combination tablets due to trace amounts of NDEA found in the valsartan ingredient in those pills. Those drugs are used to control high blood pressure and to treat heart failure. 
N-nitrosodiethylamine is a suspected human and animal carcinogen that is used in gasoline and as a lubricant additive, according to the National Institutes of Health.
The ingredient in the tainted losartan potassium pills was made by Hetero Labs Ltd., based in India. That company has had manufacturing problems; it received a warning letter from the FDA in 2017 after an inspection found significant violations of good manufacturing practice regulations for finished pharmaceuticals.
The FDA started additional tests of these heart drugs, angiotensin II receptor blockers or ARBs, this summer after labs found that NDEA and another cancer-causing contaminant, NDMA, was accidentally added to some of these drugs. 
The contaminants first showed up in drugs that contained valsartan, but subsequent tests have found them in others made by a Chinese company, Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., and by Hetero Labs Ltd.
The FDA continues to test the ingredient for cancer-causing chemicals. It also keeps a list of drugs that have been recalled and a list of drugs that have not been recalled. The recalls have been expanded several times since the initial recall over the summer.
If your drug is on the recall list, the FDA suggests that you countinue taking it until your doctor or pharmacist provides a replacement. Because not all valsartan, losartan potassium and irbesartan drugs are involved in the recall, you might be able to switch to another company's version.
It's unclear exactly what the cancer risk is if you take the contaminated pills; the FDA believes that the risk is low.
TM & © 2019 Cable News Network, Inc., a Time Warner Company. All rights reserved.
 Load-Date: January 5, 2019

 

End of Document


Aurobindo, DRL recall drugs
Times of India (Electronic Edition)
February 16, 2017 Thursday
Hyderabad Edition

 Copyright 2017 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: TIMES BUSINESS
Length: 225 words
Body




City-based pharma giants Dr Reddy's Laboratories (DRL) and Aurobindo Pharma have initiated drug recalls from the US market. While DRL has recalled Olanzapine tablets, used to treat symptoms of psychotic conditions such as schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, Aurobindo has recalled Pantoprazole Sodium for injection that is used in the treatment of gastroesophageal reflux disease.According to information available on the USFDA website, DRL has voluntarily recalled 5,904 bottles of Olanzapine tablets (USP, 2.5 mg, packaged in a 30-count bottles) manufactured at its Bachupally unit. 
The recall was initiated on October 13, 2016.Citing the reason for the recall, it said, \x93Failed impuritiesdegradation specifications: due to out-of-specification result for the related substance compound C (Impurity 6 N-Oxide at the 18 month stability station)\x93. The recall falls under 'Class III', which according to the USFDA is a situation in which use of or exposure to a violative product is not likely to cause adverse health consequences. Aurobindo, on the other hand, has voluntarily recalled 29,800 vials of Pantoprazole Sodium for injection, (single dose 40mg vial) from the US market. The recall was initiated on December 16, 2016., Aurobindo said, \x93Discoloration: Some vials were found to contain powder with a yellowish-brownish appearance.\x93
 Load-Date: February 15, 2017

 

End of Document


Aurobindo expands recall of drug for impurities from US
DNA
March 5, 2019 Tuesday

 Copyright 2019 Diligent Media Corporation Ltd., DNA (Daily News & Analysis), distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 566 words
Byline: DNA Money Correspondent
Body




Mumbai: The nationwide voluntary recall of high blood pressure drug in the US by the Indian drug manufacturing companies continues as federal investigations discovered potential cancer-causing impurities in them.
The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recently said that AurobindoPharma USA, Inc has expanded its voluntary recall of medicines used for treating blood pressure to the consumer level.
This is an expansion of its earlier recall initiated on December 31, 2018.
Around 38 lots of Valsartan, Amlodipine and Valsartan tablets were detected with trace amounts of an unexpected impurity, N-nitrosodiethylamine (NDEA), found in the finished drug product. The substance occurs naturally in certain foods, drinking water, air pollution and industrial processes, and has been classified as a probable human carcinogen as per International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) classification.
The expansion relates to lots distributed under the labels for AurobindoPharma USA, Inc. and Acetris Health, LLC.
To date, AurobindoPharma USA, Inc has not received any reports of adverse events related to this recall.
Amlodipine and Valsartan Tablets USP and Valsartan Tablets USP are indicated to control high blood pressure and for the treatment of heart failure.
Recently, Ahmedabad-based Torrent Pharmaceuticals Limited has also initiated a voluntary recall of 60 lots of Losartan potassium tablets USP and 54 lots of Losartan potassium/  hydrochlorothiazide tablets, USP, to the consumer level due to the presence of another probable cancer-causing impurity N-Methylnitrosobutyric acid (NMBA) found in an active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) manufactured by Hetero Labs Ltd.
Torrent is recalling Losartan-containing products that contain NMBA above the acceptable daily intake levels released by the FDA.
Losartan is used to treat hypertension, hypertensive patients with left ventricular hypertrophy and for the treatment of nephropathy in Type 2 diabetic patients.
Losartan potassium and hydrochlorothiazide tablets, USP is used to treat hypertension.
Last year, similar recalls of hypertension drugs were made by both the companies after the probabale human carcinogen was detected in the API of these products.
Last month, Macleods Pharmaceuticals has also initiated recall of one lot of Losartan Potassium/ Hydrochlorothiazide combination tablets due to the presence of NDEA in the finished product manufactured with API made by Hetero.
Meanwhile, Dr Reddy's Laboratories recently initiated nationwide recall of 10,656 bottles of Divalproex sodium extended-release tablets, USP 250 mg in the US after out of specification results were observed for high dissolution. The medicine is used to treat manic episodes associated with bipolar disorder, epilepsy, and migraine headaches.
Last month, Lupin, another domestic pharma major, has initiated a voluntary recall of 44,640 bottles of Lovastatin tablets USP, 40 mg, packed in 60 and 100 counts bottles in the US and Puerto Rico, after the finished product made with Lovastatin drug substance was out of specification for individual impurity results. Lovastatin is a statin medication used to treat high blood cholesterol and reduce the risk of cardiovascular disease.Bitter dose
Torrent is recalling products that contain NMBA above the acceptable intake levels released by the FDAr
Macleods Pharma recalled one lot of Losartan Potassium tablets last month
 Load-Date: March 5, 2019

 

End of Document


FDA Expands Blood Pressure Drugs Recall
Medical Daily
June 28, 2019 Friday 8:45 AM EST

 Copyright 2019 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 544 words
Body




Jun 28, 2019( Medical Daily: http://www.medicaldaily.com Delivered by Newstex)  The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) once again expanded its recall of some of the widely prescribed blood pressure drugs this month for the reason that it has been contaminated with a chemical compound that is often linked to cancer.The latest drug recall news, which was announced on the FDA website[1], claimed that it had targeted about 32 lots of the drug losartan sold by the well-known Macleods Pharmaceuticals. This company said that they would voluntarily recall the affected batches.Losartan is known by the public as a generic ARB or angiotensin II receptor blocker. This drug is used to treat patients experiencing heart failure or those with high blood pressure.Last year, there have been batches of generic ARBs[2] that were also withdrawn. 
Upon investigation, the batches contained nitrosamines, a chemical contaminant that increases the risk of different kinds of cancer.FDA spokesperson Jeremy Kahn shared with NBC News[3] that 'the FDA is continuing to work with manufacturers to swiftly remove medications from the market if they contain unacceptable levels of nitrosamines.'Kahn said that they will continue their investigation as part of their commitment to making sure patients are receiving an adequate and safe supply of ARBs.Moreover, losartan is not the only ARB medication recalled during the investigation. Others that are also affected include irbesartan and valsartan.Patients who regularly take ARB medications are highly advised to contact their physician and pharmacist to ensure whether or not the medication that was provided to them are on the list. This list[4] can be found on the FDA official website. It comprises the contaminated batches that have been recalled by the agency.Cardiologist Dr. Sadiya Khan, who is also an assistant professor of medicine at Northwestern University's Feinberg School of Medicine in Chicago, shared that it is indeed confusing because there are numerous formulations when it comes to these ARB medications.By referring to the list provided by the FDA, patients are better able to prevent themselves from incurring a high level of risk for a particular kind of cancer.'There are lots of alternative blood pressure medications that patients can be switched over to,' Khan assured the public. A picture taken in a pharmacy in Orleans on January 11, 2018 shows medicine on shelves. - France said on January 11 there has been a "major dysfunction" in a recall of baby milk after stores sold potentially contaminated products despite being told to take them off their shelves. GUILLAUME SOUVANT/AFP/Getty Images [ 1]: https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts/macleods-pharmaceutical-limited-issues-voluntary-nationwide-consumer-level-recall-losartan-potassium [ 2]:            https://www.nbcnews.com/health/heart-health/fda-expands-blood-pressure-drug-recall-fifth-time-year-n998911 [ 3]:            https://www.nbcnews.com/health/health-news/fda-once-again-expands-recall-blood-pressure-drugs-n1023446 [ 4]:            https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts/macleods-pharmaceutical-limited-issues-voluntary-nationwide-consumer-level-recall-losartan-potassium 
 Load-Date: June 28, 2019

 

End of Document


FDA downplays risks from already recalled heartburn drug Zantac
Postmedia Breaking News
November 1, 2019 Friday
Web Edition

 Copyright 2019 Postmedia Breaking News All Rights Reserved
Section: PMN HEALTH
Length: 437 words
Body




NEW YORK - The U.S. Food and Drug Administration on Friday downplayed the risk caused by contamination of the already recalled popular heartburn drug Zantac, and said its tests suggest it does not cause carcinogens to form after ingestion by patients.
Janet Woodcock, director of the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, said in a statement that the levels of the probable carcinogen N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) it found in ranitidine - sold under the brand name Zantac - "are similar to the levels you would expect to be exposed to if you ate common foods like grilled or smoked meats."
Still, the FDA released results of its testing https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/laboratory-tests-ranitidine(            https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/laboratory-tests-ranitidine ) on branded and generic ranitidine products that showed some versions of the over-the-counter medicine had as much as nine times the regulator's "acceptable limit" for NDMA.
The FDA said tests it ran to simulate how Zantac reacts in users' stomachs and small intestines suggest it does not cause NDMA to form there. The agency said it still plans to test the drugs in human patients to fully understand if NDMA forms after ingestion.
Zantac, sold in the United States by French drugmaker Sanofi SA, and some generic versions of the treatment have been recalled due to possible NDMA contamination. The FDA had said in October it found unacceptable levels of NDMA in drugs containing ranitidine.
The theory that ranitidine causes NDMA to form in patients bodies had previously been raised by Valisure, an online pharmacy that originally flagged the potential contamination to the FDA.
Valisure Chief Executive David Light in a statement criticized FDA testing methods as "overly simplistic conditions that do not properly evaluate a real-world stomach" and urged the agency to completely recall ranitidine and a similar drug, nizatidine.
Retailers including Walmart Inc, CVS Health Corp , Walgreens Boots Alliance Inc and Rite Aid Corp have stopped selling Zantac and generic ranitidine.
The FDA said last week that early tests of alternative heartburn treatments such as Pepcid, Tagamet, Nexium, Prevacid and Prilosec have not found NDMA.
NDMA had previously been found in some blood pressure medicines from a class of drugs known as angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs). Those impurities are believed to have been introduced by recent changes in the manufacturing process. (Reporting by Michael Erman Editing by Jonathan Oatis and Bill Berkrot) !@COPYRIGHT=© 2019 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.
 Load-Date: November 1, 2019

 

End of Document


FDA downplays risks from already recalled heartburn drug Zantac
National Post (f/k/a The Financial Post) (Canada)
November 1, 2019 Friday
Web Edition

 Copyright 2019 National Post All Rights Reserved
Section: PMN HEALTH
Length: 437 words
Body




NEW YORK - The U.S. Food and Drug Administration on Friday downplayed the risk caused by contamination of the already recalled popular heartburn drug Zantac, and said its tests suggest it does not cause carcinogens to form after ingestion by patients.
Janet Woodcock, director of the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, said in a statement that the levels of the probable carcinogen N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) it found in ranitidine - sold under the brand name Zantac - "are similar to the levels you would expect to be exposed to if you ate common foods like grilled or smoked meats."
Still, the FDA released results of its testing https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/laboratory-tests-ranitidine(            https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/laboratory-tests-ranitidine ) on branded and generic ranitidine products that showed some versions of the over-the-counter medicine had as much as nine times the regulator's "acceptable limit" for NDMA.
The FDA said tests it ran to simulate how Zantac reacts in users' stomachs and small intestines suggest it does not cause NDMA to form there. The agency said it still plans to test the drugs in human patients to fully understand if NDMA forms after ingestion.
Zantac, sold in the United States by French drugmaker Sanofi SA, and some generic versions of the treatment have been recalled due to possible NDMA contamination. The FDA had said in October it found unacceptable levels of NDMA in drugs containing ranitidine.
The theory that ranitidine causes NDMA to form in patients bodies had previously been raised by Valisure, an online pharmacy that originally flagged the potential contamination to the FDA.
Valisure Chief Executive David Light in a statement criticized FDA testing methods as "overly simplistic conditions that do not properly evaluate a real-world stomach" and urged the agency to completely recall ranitidine and a similar drug, nizatidine.
Retailers including Walmart Inc, CVS Health Corp , Walgreens Boots Alliance Inc and Rite Aid Corp have stopped selling Zantac and generic ranitidine.
The FDA said last week that early tests of alternative heartburn treatments such as Pepcid, Tagamet, Nexium, Prevacid and Prilosec have not found NDMA.
NDMA had previously been found in some blood pressure medicines from a class of drugs known as angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs). Those impurities are believed to have been introduced by recent changes in the manufacturing process. (Reporting by Michael Erman Editing by Jonathan Oatis and Bill Berkrot) !@COPYRIGHT=© 2019 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.
 Load-Date: January 29, 2020

 

End of Document


FDA downplays risks from already recalled heartburn drug Zantac
Postmedia Breaking News
November 1, 2019 Friday
Web Edition

 Copyright 2019 Postmedia Breaking News All Rights Reserved
Section: PMN HEALTH
Length: 281 words
Body




NEW YORK - The U.S. Food and Drug Administration on Friday downplayed the risk from contamination of the already recalled popular heartburn drug Zantac, and said its tests suggest it does not cause carcinogens to form in patients.
Janet Woodcock, director of the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, said in a statement that the levels of contamination it found in ranitidine - commonly known as Zantac - with the probable carcinogen N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) "are similar to the levels you would expect to be exposed to if you ate common foods like grilled or smoked meats."
Still, the FDA released results of its testing https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/laboratory-tests-ranitidine(            https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/laboratory-tests-ranitidine ) on ranitidine products and showed that some versions of the drug had as much as nine times the regulator's "acceptable limit" for NDMA.
The FDA also said that tests it ran to simulate how Zantac reacts in users' stomachs and small intestines suggest it does not cause NDMA to form there. But the regulator said it still plans to test the drugs in human patients to fully understand whether it causes NDMA to form in users' bodies.
Zantac, sold over-the-counter in the United States by French drugmaker Sanofi SA, and some of its generic versions have been recalled due to possible NDMA contamination of pills that had not yet been consumed. The FDA said earlier this month it found unacceptable levels of NDMA in drugs containing ranitidine. (Reporting by Michael Erman Editing by Chris Reese and Jonathan Oatis) !@COPYRIGHT=© 2019 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.
 Load-Date: November 1, 2019

 

End of Document


Recall of blood pressure drug losartan expanded
FOX - 31 KDVR (Denver)
April 20, 2019 Saturday

 Copyright 2019 Local TV LLC
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 397 words
Byline: Tribune Media Wire
Body




×
Recall of blood pressure drug losartan expanded
 WASHINGTON — If you take blood pressure medicine, you'll want to double-check your bottle. Torrent Pharmaceuticals Ltd. has expanded its recall of losartan potassium and losartan potassium/hydrochlorothiazide tablets.
 Tests found trace amounts of a potentially cancer-causing impurity called N-methylnitrosobutyric acid in some of these drugs. The company is recalling 36 additional lots, it said Thursday.
 A full list of recalled drugs is available on the US Food and Drug Administration website.
 The company hasn't had any reports of users getting sick, but the impurity level in these pills is above what the FDA considers an acceptable daily intake level.
 Doctors prescribe losartan for patients with high blood pressure and for Type 2 diabetics who have nephropathy. The FDA advises patients who take these drugs — even the ones that have been recalled — to continue taking them but to talk to their doctor or pharmacist immediately about alternative treatment.
 This latest recall is related to the valsartan recall that has been expanded multiple times since July. The FDA put the Chinese company Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceutical on an import alert after it learned that the company made the tainted ingredient that is at the heart of most of these recalls. The impurity is a chemical that is used in gasoline as a stabilizer and as a lubricant additive.
 The FDA started testing all heart drugs called angiotensin II receptor blockers for these impurities. Also known as ARBs, they block a potent chemical in the blood called angiotensin that causes muscles surrounding blood vessels to contract. When the chemical binds, it narrows the vessels, and that can cause high blood pressure.
 It's unclear exactly what the cancer risk is if you take the contaminated pills; the FDA believed that the risk was low with the valsartan recall.
 It estimated that if 8,000 people took the highest dose of valsartan (320 milligrams) containing the impurity, N-nitrosodimethylamine or NDMA, from these recalled batches daily for four years, there may be one additional case of cancer over the total lifetimes. Many patients take a much lower dose of valsartan, and therefore their risks are theoretically much lower.
 The FDA said it will continue to test all products containing valsartan and similar drugs for the presence of impurities.
 AlertMe
 Load-Date: April 21, 2019

 

End of Document


Recall of blood pressure drug losartan expanded
CBS - 3 WREG (Memphis, Tennessee)
April 19, 2019 Friday

 Copyright 2019 Local TV LLC
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 393 words
Byline: Tribune Media Wire
Body




×
Recall of blood pressure drug losartan expanded
 If you take blood pressure medicine, you'll want to double-check your bottle. Torrent Pharmaceuticals Ltd. has expanded its recall of losartan potassium and losartan potassium/hydrochlorothiazide tablets.
 Tests found trace amounts of a potentially cancer-causing impurity called N-methylnitrosobutyric acid in some of these drugs. The company is recalling 36 additional lots, it said Thursday.
 A full list of recalled drugs is available on the US Food and Drug Administration website.
 The company hasn't had any reports of users getting sick, but the impurity level in these pills is above what the FDA considers an acceptable daily intake level.
 Doctors prescribe losartan for patients with high blood pressure and for Type 2 diabetics who have nephropathy. The FDA advises patients who take these drugs — even the ones that have been recalled — to continue taking them but to talk to their doctor or pharmacist immediately about alternative treatment.
 This latest recall is related to the valsartan recall that has been expanded multiple times since July. The FDA put the Chinese company Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceutical on an import alert after it learned that the company made the tainted ingredient that is at the heart of most of these recalls. The impurity is a chemical that is used in gasoline as a stabilizer and as a lubricant additive.
 The FDA started testing all heart drugs called angiotensin II receptor blockers for these impurities. Also known as ARBs, they block a potent chemical in the blood called angiotensin that causes muscles surrounding blood vessels to contract. When the chemical binds, it narrows the vessels, and that can cause high blood pressure.
 It's unclear exactly what the cancer risk is if you take the contaminated pills; the FDA believed that the risk was low with the valsartan recall.
 It estimated that if 8,000 people took the highest dose of valsartan (320 milligrams) containing the impurity, N-nitrosodimethylamine or NDMA, from these recalled batches daily for four years, there may be one additional case of cancer over the total lifetimes. Many patients take a much lower dose of valsartan, and therefore their risks are theoretically much lower.
 The FDA said it will continue to test all products containing valsartan and similar drugs for the presence of impurities.
 Load-Date: April 20, 2019

 

End of Document


FDA downplays risks from already recalled heartburn drug Zantac
National Post (f/k/a The Financial Post) (Canada)
November 1, 2019 Friday
Web Edition

 Copyright 2019 National Post All Rights Reserved
Section: PMN HEALTH
Length: 281 words
Body




NEW YORK - The U.S. Food and Drug Administration on Friday downplayed the risk from contamination of the already recalled popular heartburn drug Zantac, and said its tests suggest it does not cause carcinogens to form in patients.
Janet Woodcock, director of the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, said in a statement that the levels of contamination it found in ranitidine - commonly known as Zantac - with the probable carcinogen N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) "are similar to the levels you would expect to be exposed to if you ate common foods like grilled or smoked meats."
Still, the FDA released results of its testing https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/laboratory-tests-ranitidine(            https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/laboratory-tests-ranitidine ) on ranitidine products and showed that some versions of the drug had as much as nine times the regulator's "acceptable limit" for NDMA.
The FDA also said that tests it ran to simulate how Zantac reacts in users' stomachs and small intestines suggest it does not cause NDMA to form there. But the regulator said it still plans to test the drugs in human patients to fully understand whether it causes NDMA to form in users' bodies.
Zantac, sold over-the-counter in the United States by French drugmaker Sanofi SA, and some of its generic versions have been recalled due to possible NDMA contamination of pills that had not yet been consumed. The FDA said earlier this month it found unacceptable levels of NDMA in drugs containing ranitidine. (Reporting by Michael Erman Editing by Chris Reese and Jonathan Oatis) !@COPYRIGHT=© 2019 Postmedia Network Inc. All rights reserved.
 Load-Date: January 29, 2020

 

End of Document


Blood Pressure Drugs Recalled Over Cancer-Causing Components
Newstex Blogs 
Medical Daily
September 23, 2019 Monday 8:45 AM EST

 Copyright 2019 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 430 words
Body




Sep 23, 2019( Medical Daily: http://www.medicaldaily.com Delivered by Newstex)  Torrent Pharmaceuticals has announced a recall of blood-pressure drugs recently found with a cancer-linked chemical. The company temporarily suspended the sale of widely used losartan potassium tablets across the U.S.The decision follows a report by federal health officials that some medications widely used in the country are contaminated with either N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) or N-nitrosodiethylamine (NDEA).Swiss pharmaceutical company Novartis also stopped delivery of generic versions of its heartburn drug Zantac in the past week due to the chemical. 
Torrent followed the move on Thursday and recalled hypertension tablets that contain NMBA, Wink News reported[1].The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) said many of the recalled blood-pressure drugs over the past year were manufactured in China and India. Officials believe the contamination occurred due to chemical reactions during the production process.This is not the first time Torrent recalled a product. Since the summer in 2018, the company suspended distribution of more than 300 lots of blood-pressure medications because of contamination.But Torrent is just one of the many manufacturers that have been recalling drugs due to potentially harmful chemicals. The list includes Aurobindo Pharma, Camber Pharmaceuticals, Legacy Pharmaceuticals, Macleods Pharmaceuticals, Prinston Pharmaceuticals, Sandoz Novartis and Teva Pharmaceuticals.Drug Recalls in U.S. Despite the growing number of drug makers making recalls, the FDA should increase efforts to monitor companies and prevent public health threats, according to Adam Garber, consumer watchdog at U.S. PIRG.The agency 'should be inspecting every version of this medication, since it seems to be a systemic problem, and it's multiple manufacturers that we're talking about,' Garber told CBS MoneyWatch. 'At this point we should be looking at alternative versions, and stopping the sale of the versions that do have these impurities.'An FDA spokesperson said there are alternative versions already available for people affected by the recalls. So far the agency listed 43 blood pressure drugs that are safe for use.'Because ARBs treat serious medical conditions, the FDA urges patients to continue taking their current medicine until a doctor or pharmacist gives a replacement or a different treatment option,' the spokesperson said. A pile of medications. Pixabay [ 1]: https://www.winknews.com/2019/09/21/more-blood-pressure-pills-recalled-over-cancer-causing-chemical/ 
 Load-Date: September 23, 2019

 

End of Document


Cadila recalls drug in US
The Telegraph (India)
October 17, 2014 Friday

 Copyright 2014 The Telegraph (India), distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 318 words
Byline: OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
Body




Mumbai, Oct. 17: Cadila Healthcare has voluntarily recalled 5,400 bottles of anti-hypertension drug Atenolol tablets in the US for failing to meet specifications.
A notification by the US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) said the recall was voluntarily initiated by the company through its US arm Zydus Pharmaceuticals.
The recall, which falls under Class II, was based on "a complaint reported by a pharmacist who stated several tablets were noticeably thicker in appearance", the USFDA said.
According to the US health regulator, Class II recall is a situation in which the use of or exposure to a violative product may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences or where the probability of serious health consequences is remote.
The drugs were manufactured by Cadila Healthcare and distributed in the US by Zydus Pharmaceuticals USA Inc.
Cadila joins the list of Indian drug companies who had to recall drugs in the US this year. In April, Lupin recalled 9,210 bottles of its antibiotic drug Suprax used to treat bacterial infection.
In March, Ranbaxy Laboratories had recalled more than 64,000 bottles of the generic version of cholesterol-lowering drug Lipitor. This came after a pharmacist found a 20mg tablet in a sealed bottle meant for 10mg tablets. It was the second recall after November 2012 when certain lots of the drug were found to contain small glass particles.
Sun Pharmaceuticals had also voluntarily recalled 2,500 bottles of a generic diabetes drug after receiving a complaint that one of the bottles contained a drug meant to treat seizures.
These withdrawals come at a time domestic companies are facing quality control issues at their plants.
Industry circles, however, said such voluntary withdrawals were initiated by companies of other countries too.
Cadila Healthcare shares closed at Rs 1,324.85 per share on the BSE, down 1.64 per cent from the previous close.
 Load-Date: October 18, 2014

 

End of Document


Mylan and Hospira both recall injected drugs after particulate discovered in vials
Indian Pharma Industry : Policies
March 20, 2019 Wednesday

 Copyright 2019 Indian Pharma Industry All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 355 words
Dateline: March 20 
Body




 March 20 -- Mylan and Hospira are both recalling injected medications because potentially dangerous particulate has been discovered in them. Mylan is recalling a chemotherapy drug, while Hospira is recalling a solution often used to treat diabetes.
 Mylan on Monday issued a voluntary nationwide recall of two lots of levoleucovorin injection, 250 mg/25 mL to the user level that were actually manufactured by Indian drugmaker Alidac Pharmaceuticals but distributed by Mylan Institutional.
 The drug, which is often used to prevent the side effects of methotrexate in patients with bone cancer, is being recalled because copper salts were found in samples during 12-month stability testing.
 Pfizer's Hospira is recalling three lots of 8.4% sodium bicarbonate injection 1 mEq/mL to the hospital level after confirming there was glass particles in some vials, the company said. The drug was produced at its Rocky Mount, North Carolina plant.
  Neither company has had any reports of adverse reactions to the injections but both warned of the potential dangers which run the gamut from local irritation to the potential for pulmonary embolism. In an email Pfizer said a health hazard assessment determined the risk from the particulate is very low.
 While the Rocky Mount plant had regulatory problems in the past, it has been free of issues from some years. The recall, however, comes as the company has been dealing with manufacturing problems at a couple of other Hospira injectables plants. The FDA this month issued a warning letter to an injectables plant in Irungattukottai, India, that Pfizer has announced it is closing after halting production there last year.
 While the FDA found problems at the facility tied to employees manipulating testing data, Pfizer has said the decision to close the Irungattukottai site, as well as another site in Aurangabad, was actually due to significant long-term loss of demand for the products they make.
 Pfizer also continues to make improvements at an injectables facility in Kansas that supplies many essential products to hospitals in the U.S. That plant was issued a warning letter in 2017.
 Load-Date: March 21, 2019

 

End of Document


Mylan and Hospira both recall injected drugs after particulate discovered in vials
FiercePharma
March 19, 2019

 Copyright 2019 Questex Media Group LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: ARTICLE
Length: 366 words
Byline: Eric Palmer
Body




Mylan and Hospira are both recalling injected medications because potentially dangerous particulate has been discovered in them. Mylan is recalling a chemotherapy drug, while Hospira is recalling a solution often used to treat diabetes.
Mylan on Monday issued a voluntary nationwide recall of two lots of levoleucovorin injection, 250 mg/25 mL to the user level that were actually manufactured by Indian drugmaker Alidac Pharmaceuticals but distributed by Mylan Institutional. 
The drug, which is often used to prevent the side effects of methotrexate in patients with bone cancer, is being recalled because copper salts were found in samples during 12-month stability testing. 
Pfizer's Hospira is recalling three lots of 8.4% sodium bicarbonate injection 1 mEq/mL to the hospital level after confirming there was glass particles in some vials, the company said. The drug was produced at its Rocky Mount, North Carolina plant.
RELATED: Pfizer still unable to get on top of problems at Hospira injectables plant
Neither company has had any reportsof adverse reactions to the injections but both warned of the potential dangers which run the gamut from local irritation to the potential for pulmonary embolism. In an email Pfizer said a health hazard assessment determined the risk from the particulate is very low.
While the Rocky Mount plant had regulatory problems in the past, it has been free of issues from some years. The recall, however, comes as the company has been dealing with manufacturing problems at a couple of other Hospira injectables plants. The FDA this month issued a warning letter to an injectables plant in Irungattukottai, India, that Pfizer has announced it is closing after halting production there last year.
While the FDA found problems at the facility tied to employees manipulating testing data, Pfizer has said the decision to close the Irungattukottai site, as well as another site in Aurangabad, was actually due to significant long-term loss of demand for the products they make. 
Pfizer also continues to make improvements at an injectables facility in Kansas that supplies many essential products to hospitals in the U.S. That plant was issued a warning letter in 2017.
 Load-Date: March 21, 2019

 

End of Document


Mylan and Hospira both recall injected drugs after particulate discovered in vials
Pharma & Healthcare Monitor Worldwide
March 20, 2019 Wednesday

 Copyright 2019 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 355 words
Body




Mylan and Hospira are both recalling injected medications because potentially dangerous particulate has been discovered in them. Mylan is recalling a chemotherapy drug, while Hospira is recalling a solution often used to treat diabetes.
Mylan on Monday issued a voluntary nationwide recall of two lots of levoleucovorin injection, 250 mg/25 mL to the user level that were actually manufactured by Indian drugmaker Alidac Pharmaceuticals but distributed by Mylan Institutional.
The drug, which is often used to prevent the side effects of methotrexate in patients with bone cancer, is being recalled because copper salts were found in samples during 12-month stability testing.
Pfizers Hospira is recalling three lots of 8.4% sodium bicarbonate injection 1 mEq/mL to the hospital level after confirming there was glass particles in some vials, the company said. The drug was produced at its Rocky Mount, North Carolina plant.
Neither company has had any reports of adverse reactions to the injections but both warned of the potential dangers which run the gamut from local irritation to the potential for pulmonary embolism. In an email Pfizer said a health hazard assessment determined the risk from the particulate is very low.
While the Rocky Mount plant had regulatory problems in the past, it has been free of issues from some years. The recall, however, comes as the company has been dealing with manufacturing problems at a couple of other Hospira injectables plants. The FDA this month issued a warning letter to an injectables plant in Irungattukottai, India, that Pfizer has announced it is closing after halting production there last year.
While the FDA found problems at the facility tied to employees manipulating testing data, Pfizer has said the decision to close the Irungattukottai site, as well as another site in Aurangabad, was actually due to significant long-term loss of demand for the products they make.
Pfizer also continues to make improvements at an injectables facility in Kansas that supplies many essential products to hospitals in the U.S. That plant was issued a warning letter in 2017. 2019 Global Data Point.
 Load-Date: March 20, 2019

 

End of Document


Carcinogenic chemical concerns spur drug recall
The Bangkok Post (Thailand)
March 15, 2019 Friday

 Copyright 2019 The Bangkok Post All Rights Reserved
Length: 275 words
Body




The Food and Drug Administration of Thailand (FDA) yesterday announced the recall of Losartan, a medication mainly used to treat high blood pressure, due to concerns about carcinogenic contamination.  Dr Thares Karasnairaviwong, FDA secretary-general, urged patients not to panic as there have not yet been any reports of negative health impacts, and patients can still use this medication produced under a different formula.
  Berlin Pharmaceutical Industry, a local manufacturer, had informed the FDA of its voluntary recall decision after other countries recalled similar products.  The firm is the only manufacturer in Thailand that has imported the problematic chemical from the India-based Hetero Lab Limited.
  There are 142 batches under two formulas: Lanzaar 50, under licence number 1A 20/53 (NG) and Lanzaar 100, under licence number 1A 3/58 (NG).  Patients can return those targeted medicines to hospitals, medical clinics and pharmacies.
  FDA deputy secretary-general, Dr Surachoke Tangwiwat said patients can use other Losartan formulas. For more information, patients can contact the FDA's Hotline at 1556.  The decision came after the US-based Macleods Pharmaceuticals Limited, last week reportedly informed the US-FDA that it is voluntarily recalling some of the Losartan formulas.
  The manufacturer reportedly said they detected trace amounts of an impurity called N-nitrosodiethylamine (NDEA), another pharmaceutical ingredient the FDA has classified as a "probable human carcinogen".  They have also detected trace amounts of N-Nitroso N-methyl-4-aminobutyric acid (NMBA), which is classified as a potential cancer-causing substance.
 Load-Date: March 18, 2019

 

End of Document


Jubilant Recalls Drug from US Mkt
Economic Times (E-Paper Edition)
May 21, 2013 Tuesday
Delhi Edition

 Copyright 2013 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: CORPORATE
Length: 266 words
Byline: SOMA DAS NEW DELHI
Body




Jubilant Cadista,a US-based subsidiary of Jubilant Lifesciences,a top Indian drug firm specialising in contract research and manufacturing services,has recalled its drug Pantoprazole Sodium (delayed release) from the US market.The drug was manufactured at Jubilant's India facility at Roorkee and was pulled out for possible deviations from prescribed good manufacturing practices (cGMP),according to a May enforcement report of the US Food and Drug Administration (US FDA).The US FDA cites the reason of recall as "cGMP deviations,oral products were not manufactured in accordance with good manufacturing practices".The drug Pantoprazole is used for short-term treatment of erosion and ulceration of the esophagus caused by gastroesophageal reflux disease.A company spokesperson confirmed the recall.The recall has been classified as class II,which means use of or exposure to the violative product may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences or where the probability of serious adverse health consequences is remote.The US drug regulator grades drugs recalls into three categories,with class I being the most severe and class III being the mildest.Jubilant's nationwide pull-out of affected lots in US is a voluntary recall,initiated by the firm.Drug recalls in the US market may happen at company's own initiatives,or when requested or ordered by the US drug regulator."In January 2013,we voluntarily recalled two batches of Pantoprazole 40 mg tablets from the US market following some minor cosmetic discrepancies that came to our notice," said a company spokesperson.
 Load-Date: May 20, 2013

 

End of Document


Dr Reddy's recalls heartburn drug Ranitidine from US market
Indian Media news
October 23, 2019 Wednesday

 Copyright 2019 Indian Media news All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 301 words
Dateline: New Delhi, 2019-10-23 14:47:10 
Body




 October 23 -- After suspending worldwide shipments of its drug Ranitidine following the ongoing probe by the US FDA into the reported carcinogenic impurity in it at low levels, Dr Reddys on Wednesday said it had initiated a voluntary recall of several lots from the US market.
The city-based drug maker said in a filing with bourses that the recall, which began on October 1, is at the retail level for Over-The-Counter products and at the consumer level for prescription products of all of its ranitidine medications sold in US due to confirmed contamination with N-Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) above levels established by FDA.
 
"This recall follows the USFDA's caution note alerting patients and health care professionals that NDMA was found in certain samples of ranitidine.
To date, Dr. Reddy's has not received any reports of adverse events related to the recall of Dr. Reddy's Ranitidine products.
The recall includes all quantities in the US that are within expiry," Dr Reddys said.
Ranitidine is used to decrease the amount of acid created by the stomach.
Dr. Reddy's had earlier told PTI that it was still evaluating the potential impact of the issue and as a precautionary measure, was suspending all worldwide shipments of Ranitidine products until the outcome of the investigation by the FDA was available.
The FDA in a statement on September 13 said it is working with international regulators and industry partners to determine the source of this impurity in Ranitidine and examining levels of NDMA in Ranitidine and evaluating any possible risk to patients.
NDMA is classified as a probable human carcinogen (a substance that could cause cancer) based on results from laboratory tests.
NDMA is a known environmental contaminant and found in water and foods, including meats, dairy products and vegetables.
 Load-Date: October 23, 2019

 

End of Document


Recall of blood pressure drug losartan expanded
CNN Wire
April 19, 2019 Friday 5:44 PM GMT

 Copyright 2019 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved
Length: 400 words
Byline: By Jen Christensen, CNN
Dateline: (CNN) 
Body




 (CNN) --  If you take blood pressure medicine, you'll want to double-check your bottle. Torrent Pharmaceuticals Ltd. has expanded its recall of losartan potassium and losartan potassium/hydrochlorothiazide tablets.
Tests found trace amounts of a potentially cancer-causing impurity called N-methylnitrosobutyric acid in some of these drugs. The company is recalling 36 additional lots, it said Thursday. 
A full list of recalled drugs is available on the US Food and Drug Administration website. 
The company hasn't had any reports of users getting sick, but the impurity level in these pills is above what the FDA considers an acceptable daily intake level.
Doctors prescribe losartan for patients with high blood pressure and for Type 2 diabetics who have nephropathy. The FDA advises patients who take these drugs -- even the ones that have been recalled -- to continue taking them but to talk to their doctor or pharmacist immediately about alternative treatment.
This latest recall is related to the valsartan recall that has been expanded multiple times since July. The FDA put the Chinese company Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceutical on an import alert after it learned that the company made the tainted ingredient that is at the heart of most of these recalls. The impurity is a chemical that is used in gasoline as a stabilizer and as a lubricant additive.
The FDA started testing all heart drugs called angiotensin II receptor blockers for these impurities. Also known as ARBs, they block a potent chemical in the blood called angiotensin that causes muscles surrounding blood vessels to contract. When the chemical binds, it narrows the vessels, and that can cause high blood pressure.
It's unclear exactly what the cancer risk is if you take the contaminated pills; the FDA believed that the risk was low with the valsartan recall.
It estimated that if 8,000 people took the highest dose of valsartan (320 milligrams) containing the impurity, N-nitrosodimethylamine or NDMA, from these recalled batches daily for four years, there may be one additional case of cancer over the total lifetimes. Many patients take a much lower dose of valsartan, and therefore their risks are theoretically much lower.
The FDA said it will continue to test all products containing valsartan and similar drugs for the presence of impurities.
TM & © 2019 Cable News Network, Inc., a Time Warner Company. All rights reserved.
 Load-Date: April 20, 2019

 

End of Document


Recall of blood pressure drug losartan expanded
Pharma & Healthcare Monitor Worldwide
April 22, 2019 Monday

 Copyright 2019 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 388 words
Body




If you take blood pressure medicine, you'll want to double-check your bottle. Torrent Pharmaceuticals Ltd. has expanded its recall of losartan potassium and losartan potassium/hydrochlorothiazide tablets.
Tests found trace amounts of a potentially cancer-causing impurity called N-methylnitrosobutyric acid in some of these drugs. The company is recalling 36 additional lots, it said Thursday.
A full list of recalled drugs is available on the US Food and Drug Administration website.
The company hasn't had any reports of users getting sick, but the impurity level in these pills is above what the FDA considers an acceptable daily intake level.
Doctors prescribe losartan for patients with high blood pressure and for Type 2 diabetics who have nephropathy. The FDA advises patients who take these drugs -- even the ones that have been recalled -- to continue taking them but to talk to their doctor or pharmacist immediately about alternative treatment.
This latest recall is related to the valsartan recall that has been expanded multiple times since July. The FDA put the Chinese company Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceutical on an import alert after it learned that the company made the tainted ingredient that is at the heart of most of these recalls. The impurity is a chemical that is used in gasoline as a stabilizer and as a lubricant additive.
The FDA started testing all heart drugs called angiotensin II receptor blockers for these impurities. Also known as ARBs, they block a potent chemical in the blood called angiotensin that causes muscles surrounding blood vessels to contract. When the chemical binds, it narrows the vessels, and that can cause high blood pressure.
It's unclear exactly what the cancer risk is if you take the contaminated pills; the FDA believed that the risk was low with the valsartan recall.
It estimated that if 8,000 people took the highest dose of valsartan (320 milligrams) containing the impurity, N-nitrosodimethylamine or NDMA, from these recalled batches daily for four years, there may be one additional case of cancer over the total lifetimes. Many patients take a much lower dose of valsartan, and therefore their risks are theoretically much lower.
The FDA said it will continue to test all products containing valsartan and similar drugs for the presence of impurities. 2019 Global Data Point.
 Load-Date: April 22, 2019

 

End of Document


Takeda recalls eye drug Natpara but warns patients not to abruptly stop treatment
FiercePharma Manufacturing
September 6, 2019

 Copyright 2019 Questex Media Group LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: ARTICLE
Length: 443 words
Byline: Eric Palmer
Highlight: Takeda's been looking for a buyer for Natpara toprovide some debt relief, but it has just run into some complicating circumstances. It is having to recall the eye drug from the market, a move it says may be very challenging for patients.\r
Body




Takeda Pharmaceutical's been looking for a buyer for Natpara toprovide some debt relief, but it has just run into some complicating circumstances. It is having to recall the eye drug from the market, a move it says may be very challenging for patients.
Takeda today announced it was voluntarily recalling all doses of the injected drug in the U.S. because there was a chance of small rubber particles shedding into the injectors.
But the Japanese drugmaker was adamant that patients mustn't stop the treatment abruptly because of the danger of a sudden drop in blood calcium levels. Instead, patients must have their doctor replace the drug with supplements and carefully monitor their calcium levels with blood tests.
RELATED: Takeda sells Shire's Xiidra, transfers 400 staffers to Novartis in $3.4B deal
“It is critically important that patients contact their prescribing healthcare provider to discuss their individual treatment plan and ensure close supervision including frequent monitoring of blood calcium levels and close titration of active vitamin D and calcium supplements upon stopping Natpara to avoid low blood calcium (hypocalcemia),” the company said.
The particles are coming from the rubber covering, or septum, in the injection cartridge. The company said that when the septum is repeatedly punctured during the 14-day treatment period, it is possible that small rubber fragments may get into the cartridge.
Takeda said it is working with the FDA to resolve the manufacturing issues that have resulted in the recall and to resume production and supply of the drug as quickly as possible.
RELATED: Takeda scouts buyers for Latin America business, a deal that could fetch $1B: report
The difficulty is that there is no alternative treatment for some patients. Natpara, a recombinant human protein, is the only drug approved in the U.S. for adults with the sometimes fatal chronic hypoparathyroidism for whom standard therapy alone is not working.
Takeda said it also is working with drug regulators in other countries where Natpara is approved, but that the drug is not being recalled in those markets at this point.
The supply interruption comes even as Takeda reportedly was looking to sell the drug as a way to improve its balance sheet after its $58 billion buyout of Shire last year. The deal was opposed by many investors because of the debt Takeda had to take on to make the buy.
Novartis provided Takeda some relief when itbought the Shire dry-eye drug Xiidra in a deal that ultimately could be worth $5.3 billion. The Swiss drugmaker also took on 400 ex-Shire employees to help it market Xiidra and the rest of its growing ophthalmic portfolio.
 Load-Date: September 6, 2019

 

End of Document


Recall of blood pressure drug losartan expanded
CNN.com
April 19, 2019 Friday 6:51 PM EST

 Copyright 2019 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved
 
Section: HEALTH
Length: 384 words
Byline: By Jen Christensen, CNN
Body




If you take blood pressure medicine, you'll want to double-check your bottle. Torrent Pharmaceuticals Ltd. has expanded its recall of losartan potassium and losartan potassium/hydrochlorothiazide tablets.
Tests found trace amounts of a potentially cancer-causing impurity called N-methylnitrosobutyric acid in some of these drugs. The company is recalling 36 additional lots, it said Thursday.
A full list of recalled drugs is available on the US Food and Drug Administration website.
The company hasn't had any reports of users getting sick, but the impurity level in these pills is above what the FDA considers an acceptable daily intake level.
Doctors prescribe losartan for patients with high blood pressure and for Type 2 diabetics who have nephropathy. The FDA advises patients who take these drugs -- even the ones that have been recalled -- to continue taking them but to talk to their doctor or pharmacist immediately about alternative treatment.
This latest recall is related to the valsartan recall that has been expanded multiple times since July. The FDA put the Chinese company Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceutical on an import alert after it learned that the company made the tainted ingredient that is at the heart of most of these recalls. The impurity is a chemical that is used in gasoline as a stabilizer and as a lubricant additive.
The FDA started testing all heart drugs called angiotensin II receptor blockers for these impurities. Also known as ARBs, they block a potent chemical in the blood called angiotensin that causes muscles surrounding blood vessels to contract. When the chemical binds, it narrows the vessels, and that can cause high blood pressure.
It's unclear exactly what the cancer risk is if you take the contaminated pills; the FDA believed that the risk was low with the valsartan recall.
It estimated that if 8,000 people took the highest dose of valsartan (320 milligrams) containing the impurity, N-nitrosodimethylamine or NDMA, from these recalled batches daily for four years, there may be one additional case of cancer over the total lifetimes. Many patients take a much lower dose of valsartan, and therefore their risks are theoretically much lower.
The FDA said it will continue to test all products containing valsartan and similar drugs for the presence of impurities.
 Load-Date: April 20, 2019

 

End of Document


Jubilant Recalls Drug from US Mkt
Economic Times (E-Paper Edition)
May 21, 2013 Tuesday
Kolkata Edition

 Copyright 2013 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: CORPORATE
Length: 266 words
Byline: SOMA DAS NEW DELHI
Body




Jubilant Cadista,a US-based subsidiary of Jubilant Lifesciences,a top Indian drug firm specialising in contract research and manufacturing services,has recalled its drug Pantoprazole Sodium (delayed release) from the US market.The drug was manufactured at Jubilant's India facility at Roorkee and was pulled out for possible deviations from prescribed good manufacturing practices (cGMP),according to a May enforcement report of the US Food and Drug Administration (US FDA).The US FDA cites the reason of recall as "cGMP deviations,oral products were not manufactured in accordance with good manufacturing practices".The drug Pantoprazole is used for short-term treatment of erosion and ulceration of the esophagus caused by gastroesophageal reflux disease.A company spokesperson confirmed the recall.The recall has been classified as class II,which means use of or exposure to the violative product may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences or where the probability of serious adverse health consequences is remote.The US drug regulator grades drugs recalls into three categories,with class I being the most severe and class III being the mildest.Jubilant's nationwide pull-out of affected lots in US is a voluntary recall,initiated by the firm.Drug recalls in the US market may happen at company's own initiatives,or when requested or ordered by the US drug regulator."In January 2013,we voluntarily recalled two batches of Pantoprazole 40 mg tablets from the US market following some minor cosmetic discrepancies that came to our notice," said a company spokesperson.
 Load-Date: May 20, 2013

 

End of Document


Trio recall drugs in US
The Telegraph (India)
December 30, 2014 Tuesday

 Copyright 2014 The Telegraph (India), distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 256 words
Byline: Our bureau
Body




New Delhi, Dec. 30: Wockhardt, Cadila Healthcare and Hospira are voluntarily recalling certain drugs in the US.
According to the information available on the website of the US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA), Wockhardt USA Inc is recalling 11,18,400 metoprolol succinate extended-release tablets, a hypertension drug, for "failed dissolution specifications".
The tablets have been manufactured by Mumbai-based Wockhardt and distributed by the company's American arm.
The recall had been initiated by the company on April 17 under Class-III, which the FDA defined as "a situation in which use of or exposure to a violative product is not likely to cause adverse health consequences".
Zydus Pharmaceuticals USA Inc, the US-based arm of Cadila Healthcare, is recalling 58,920 bottles of benzonatate capsules, used to treat coughs, because of "wet and/or leaking capsules".
The recall had been initiated on November 26 under Class-II, which the FDA states as a situation in which the use of or exposure to a violative product may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences. The capsules have been manufactured by Ahmedabad-based Cadila Healthcare and distributed by Zydus Pharmaceuticals USA.
Further, Hospira is recalling 2,61,706 vials of meropenem, an antibiotic, in the US, Puerto Rico, Italy, the Netherlands and Spain for having "defective container".
"Glass vials may crack due to low (thin) out of specification vial wall thickness which may lead to contamination and lack of assurance of sterility," the FDA said.
 Load-Date: December 31, 2014

 

End of Document


Tylenol manufacturer recalls drugs
Fiji Times (Australia)
July 12, 2010 Monday
1 Edition

 Copyright 2010 Nationwide News Pty Limited All Rights Reserved
Section: LOCAL; Pg. 3
Length: 258 words
Byline: Riteshni Singh
Body




McNEIL Health Care has confirmed only one product from the 21 recalled was distributed in Fiji.
McNeil Health Care's Nicholas Campbell said only Tylenol Extra Strength Caplet was sold in Fiji and they were in the process of getting distributors and retailers to take it off the shelf.
He said the recall process started in Fiji on Friday.
He said consumers could either get a refund for the average retail price of the product from their point of purchase or return the affected product for a full refund with the local distributors, Health Care Products International.
It was earlier revealed that McNeil Consumer Health Care was recalling 21 over the counter medicines. In a statement, McNeil Health Care said the recalled products were currently being sold in the United States, Fiji, Guatemala, Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico, Trinidad & Tobago, and Jamaica.
The drugs being recalled included Benadryl, Children's Tylenol, Motrin IB, Tylenol Extra strength, Tylenol Day and Night and Tylenol PM.
The company announced the latest recall on Thursday and said it was a follow-up to a product recall that McNeil Consumer Health Care originally announced on January 15.
The recall on January 15 was initiated following consumer complaints of a musty or mouldy odour, which has been linked to the presence of trace amounts of a chemical called 2,4,6-tribromoanisole (TBA).
"The risk of serious adverse medical events is remote. This recall is being conducted with the knowledge of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)," the company said in a statement.
 Load-Date: July 11, 2010

 

End of Document


FDA EXPLAINS LEVELS OF IMPURITY FOUND IN RECALLED HEARTBURN DRUGS
States News Service
November 1, 2019 Friday

 Copyright 2019 States News Service
Length: 283 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: ROCKVILLE, MD 
Body




The following information was released by the Regulatory Affairs Professionals Society:
By Zachary Brennan
Following a series of recalls for the heartburn drug Zantac and other ranitidine drugs due to a genotoxic impurity, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) said Friday that the levels of the impurity in ranitidine drugs for heartburn and also in the chemically similar ulcer drug nizatidine are similar to the levels you would expect to be exposed to if you ate common foods like grilled or smoked meats.
The agency also published a table of the ranitidine and nizatidine samples tested, showing how some of the products would and would not be considered reasonably safe for human ingestion based on lifetime exposure.
The impurity, N-Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), was present in all samples tested, FDA said.
Although many of these levels of NDMA observed through FDA testing are much lower than the levels some third-party scientists first claimed, some levels still exceed what the FDA considers acceptable for these medicines, said Janet Woodcock, director of FDAs Center for Drug Evaluation and Research.
For instance, ranitidine products from Sandoz, Aurobindo and Dr Reddy's exceeded the acceptable daily intake limit for NDMA, while ranitidine products from Strides Shasun and Watson did not, according to FDAs analysis. The agencys tests of samples of other drugs, such as Pepcid (famotidine), Tagamet (cimetidine), Nexium (esomeprazole), Prevacid (lansoprazole) and Prilosec (omeprazole) show no NDMA impurities.
FDA is now calling on the companies to voluntarily withdraw ranitidine and nizatidine products that do not meet the agency's NDMA threshold (96 nanograms per day or 0.32 ppm).
 Load-Date: November 2, 2019

 

End of Document


GlaxoSmithKline recalls drug made in Nebraska
The Associated Press State & Local Wire
February 29, 2012 Wednesday 10:25 PM GMT

 Copyright 2012 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 292 words
Dateline: LINCOLN Neb.
Body




A global pharmaceutical company is recalling nearly 400,000 bottles of a blood pressure drug that was packaged in Nebraska.
The Lincoln Journal Star reports (http://bit.ly/zlfbf9 ) that GlaxoSmithKline initiated a recall of the drug DynaCirc CR, which was made at the Novartis plant east of Lincoln.
Novartis manufactured the generic drug on a contract basis at the Lincoln site.
GlaxoSmithKline said in a statement it has received no complaints about contamination or tablet mix-ups. But the company cited a Food and Drug Administration report that found "compliance concerns" related to line clearance during the plant's packaging process.
The GlaxoSmithKline action is the second recall of drugs at the site this year. Novartis recalled several of its over-the-counter medicines in January, including Excedrin, Bufferin, GasX and NoDoz.
The following day, the FDA warned that pain medications Novartis manufactured in Lincoln for Endo Pharmaceuticals could have been contaminated with other products. But the FDA stopped short of ordering the drugs recalled.
Novartis shut down manufacturing at the Lincoln plant in mid-December after several scathing inspection reports from the FDA.
The FDA documented numerous repeat violations, including the failure to investigate consumer complaints and poor quality-control procedures that allowed some medicines produced there to become contaminated.
The shutdown already has cost Novartis more than $200 million, and the company has said it does not expect the plant to restart production until the summer.
Despite laying off more than 100 temporary workers, the company has kept all of the more than 600 permanent employees working during the shutdown.
Information from: The Lincoln Journal Star, http://journalstar.com/
 Load-Date: March 1, 2012

 

End of Document


Lupin, Cadila Healthcare recall drugs in US
BioSpectrum (India)
December 10, 2017

 Copyright 2017 BioSpectrum (India), distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 255 words
Body




Lupin, Cadila Healthcare recall drugs in US The drug was manufactured by Lupin Goa
Drug firms Lupin and Cadila Healthcare are recalling nearly 1.11 lakh units of Duloxetine delayed-release capsules and 19,812 bottles of Paroxetine tablets, respectively, from the US market, the US health regulator has said.
Lupin Pharmaceuticals is recalling 1,11,648 units of Duloxetine delayed-release capsules USP, in the strength of 30 mg, on account of failed dissolution specification, the United States Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) said in its latest Enforcement Report. The drug was manufactured by Lupin Goa, the report added.
The ongoing voluntary nationwide recall is a class III recall, it said. Zydus Pharmaceuticals USA Inc, arm of Cadila Healthcare, is also recalling 19,812 bottles of Paroxetine tablets in the strength of 30 mg from the US market.
The reason for the ongoing voluntary nationwide recall is "presence of foreign tablets/capsules: Risperidone tablets were found in bottle of Paroxetine tablets", the report stated.
The product was manufactured by Cadila Healthcare and the recall is a class II recall, the regulator added.
A class II recall is initiated in a "situation in which use of or exposure to a violative product may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences or where the probability of serious adverse health consequences is remote".
A class III recall, on the other hand, kicks in where use of or exposure to a violative product is not likely to cause adverse health consequences.
 Load-Date: December 11, 2017

 

End of Document


Class 1 recall for pediatric drug pumps
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
December 21, 2019 Saturday
METRO EDITION

 Copyright 2019 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D
Length: 391 words
Byline: JOE CARLSON; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: A software problem with the Smiths Medical devices deemed potentially dangerous or lethal.
Body




The Food and Drug Administration has classified a recall of about 600 pediatric drug-infusion pumps made by Plymouth-based Smiths Medical as a Class 1 recall, meaning that a software problem in the pumps could lead to injuries or death.
In October, Smiths Medical contacted customers about a software problem that triggered a focused recall of 626 specific devices that were initially sent to customers in three states: Colorado, New York and Maryland. The affected devices were Medfusion 4000 Syringe Pumps with Firmware Version 1.7.0. ("Firmware" is software intended to permanently reside on a computer to make a device work.)
Medfusion 4000 syringe pumps are portable devices widely used in children's hospitals and neonatal intensive-care units as well as in operating rooms and adult critical care units, Smiths Medical said.
A drug-infusion pump is a machine that continuously moves medications into a patient's IV line at a specific rate, and can be programmed to
deliver drugs over a period of time. A syringe pump like the Medfusion 4000 is a type of pump that takes small amounts of medication directly from a syringe, instead of from a large, clear bag hanging on a rod at the patient bedside.
Smiths said the Medfusion 4000 pump can reliably deliver drug doses as low as 0.01 mL per hour.
The recall announcement said a problem in the 1.7.0 firmware could cause the low-battery alarm to stop working.
"If the battery alarms do not work, the health care provider using the pump will not receive audible or visual notification that the battery is shutting down. This may lead to an interruption of therapy which may lead to serious injury, adverse events, or death," an FDA recall announcement published this week says.
No injuries or deaths have been reported, but Smiths Medical received at least 74 complaints related to the software update. Smiths advised customers in October to locate any affected pumps and send them back to the manufacturer for processing.
If those customers had already distributed any of the potentially affected products to other parties, they were told to contact those recipients and forward a copy of the recall notice as well.
The full list of product serial numbers affected by the recall can be found by searching for the word "Medfusion" in the FDA's database of medical device recalls.
Joe Carlson · 612-673-4779
 Load-Date: December 23, 2019

 

End of Document


Takeda recalls eye drug Natpara but warns patients not to abruptly stop treatment
Pharma & Healthcare Monitor Worldwide
September 9, 2019 Monday

 Copyright 2019 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 417 words
Body




Takeda Pharmaceuticals been looking for a buyer for Natpara to provide some debt relief, but it has just run into some complicating circumstances. It is having to recall the eye drug from the market, a move it says may be very challenging for patients.
Takeda today announced it was voluntarily recalling all doses of the injected drug in the U.S. because there was a chance of small rubber particles shedding into the injectors.
But the Japanese drugmaker was adamant that patients mustnt stop the treatment abruptly because of the danger of a sudden drop in blood calcium levels. Instead, patients must have their doctor replace the drug with supplements and carefully monitor their calcium levels with blood tests.
It is critically important that patients contact their prescribing healthcare provider to discuss their individual treatment plan and ensure close supervision including frequent monitoring of blood calcium levels and close titration of active vitamin D and calcium supplements upon stopping Natpara to avoid low blood calcium (hypocalcemia), the company said.
The particles are coming from the rubber covering, or septum, in the injection cartridge. The company said that when the septum is repeatedly punctured during the 14-day treatment period, it is possible that small rubber fragments may get into the cartridge.
Takeda said it is working with the FDA to resolve the manufacturing issues that have resulted in the recall and to resume production and supply of the drug as quickly as possible.
The difficulty is that there is no alternative treatment for some patients. Natpara, a recombinant human protein, is the only drug approved in the U.S. for adults with the sometimes fatal chronic hypoparathyroidism for whom standard therapy alone is not working.
Takeda said it also is working with drug regulators in other countries where Natpara is approved, but that the drug is not being recalled in those markets at this point.
The supply interruption comes even as Takeda reportedly was looking to sell the drug as a way to improve its balance sheet after its $58 billion buyout of Shire last year. The deal was opposed by many investors because of the debt Takeda had to take on to make the buy.
Novartis provided Takeda some relief when it bought the Shire dry-eye drug Xiidra in a deal that ultimately could be worth $5.3 billion. The Swiss drugmaker also took on 400 ex-Shire employees to help it market Xiidra and the rest of its growing ophthalmic portfolio. 2019 Global Data Point.
 Load-Date: September 9, 2019

 

End of Document


PHARMACY RECALLS DRUGS
Pittsburgh Post-Gazette
April 22, 2013 Monday
SOONER EDITION

 Copyright 2013 P.G. Publishing Co.
Section: NATIONAL; NATIONAL BRIEFS; Pg. A-5
Length: 471 words
Byline: Compiled from news services
Body




LAKE MARY, Fla. -- A Florida-based compounding pharmacy is recalling all lots of its sterile non-expired drug products sold nationwide over concerns the products are not sterile and may contain bacteria, Food and Drug Administration officials said Sunday.
The FDA encouraged health care facilities and providers who have received sterile products, including all injectables, from Balanced Solutions Compounding Pharmacy to check their medical supplies, quarantine the products, and follow the recall instructions.
Big drop in gasoline prices
DALLAS -- The average price for regular gasoline at U.S. pumps fell 11.04 cents a gallon in the past two weeks to $3.5363 a gallon, according to Lundberg Survey.
The survey covers the period ended April 19 and is based on data obtained at about 2,500 filling stations. The average price has fallen 25.87 cents from the peak on Feb. 22, and 37.64 cents from the price on April 20, 2012, said Trilby Lundberg, president of Lundberg Survey.
The highest price in the lower 48 states among the markets surveyed was in Chicago, where the average was $3.97 a gallon. The lowest price was in Tulsa, Okla., at $3.21 a gallon.
Private rocket launched
WASHINGTON -- The first launch of the Antares rocket, which is intended to fill an important niche in the U.S. space program, took place Sunday at a NASA facility on Virginia's Atlantic Coast.
Liftoff of the slender, 133-foot long Orbital Sciences rocket from Wallops Island was a key step in a NASA program calling for private companies to deliver supplies to the international space station.
The simulated cargo carrier was to separate from Antares and go into orbit and it appeared that initial expectations were met. Still to come is a demonstration in which a cargo vessel will actually go to the space station.
Tapestry returned to Spain
WASHINGTON -- A 600-year-old tapestry stolen from a Spanish cathedral was returned to Spain last week in a ceremony at the Washington residence of Spain's ambassador.
The tapestry was turned over Wednesday by U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, an agency of the Homeland Security Department. Officials said ICE had seized the tapestry in Houston last year after it was sold at an auction.
The wool and silk tapestry depicts the Virgin Mary and the infant Jesus, along with three saints. Once an altarpiece in a cathedral in Roda de Isabena, the item was stolen in 1979, ICE said.
Search for 4 called off
HOUSTON -- The Coast Guard has called off its search for four fishermen who went missing off the Texas Gulf Coast after their boat sank.
The effort was suspended Sunday afternoon after rescue crews searched a 5,400-square-mile area. The 50-foot vessel sank early Friday morning about 115 miles southeast of Galveston.
There were five men onboard the boat, called the Nite Owl. One of them was rescued Friday.
 Load-Date: April 22, 2013

 

End of Document


Vivimed recalls hypertensive drug from US market due to impurities
Business Line
May 10, 2019 Friday

 Copyright 2019 Business Line All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 277 words
Dateline: May 10 
Body




 May 10 -- Vivimed Life Sciences Pvt Ltd, a city-based pharma company has started recalling 19 lots of Losartan Potassium Tablets USP 25 milligrams (mg), 50 mg, and 100 mg to consumer level in United States (US), as the product was found to have impurities that may cause cancer, a US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) said.
 The product is made by Vivimed at its Plant in Alathur, Chennai and distributed by Heritage Pharmaceuticals Inc, East Brunswick NJ in the US.
 To date, neither Vivimed nor Heritage has received any reports of adverse events related to this recall, it said.
 "Vivimed Life Sciences Pvt Ltd (Vivimed) is recalling 19 lots of Losartan Potassium Tablets USP 25 mg, 50 mg, and 100 mg to consumer level due to detection of an impurity N-Nitroso-N-methyl-4-aminobutyric acid (NMBA) that is above the US Food and Drug Administration's interim acceptable exposure limit of 9.82 ppm.
 Based on the available information, the risk of developing cancer in a few patients following long-term use of the product containing high levels of the impurity NMBA cannot be ruled out," the FDA said.
 Losartan Potassium is indicated for the treatment of hypertension, hypertensive patients with left ventricular hypertrophy, nephropathy in Type 2 diabetic patients and is packaged in 90-count and 1000-count bottles.
 Torrent Pharmaceuticals Ltd also started recalling certain batches of Losartan Potassium Tablets USP and Losartan Potassium/hydrochlorothiazide tablets, USP, to the consumer level due to the detection of trace amounts of an unexpected impurity found in an active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) manufactured by Hyderabad-based Hetero Labs Ltd.
 Load-Date: May 14, 2019

 

End of Document


Heartburn drug recalled over cancer fears
Daily Nation (Kenya)
October 2, 2019 Wednesday

 Copyright 2019 Nation Media Group Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 450 words
Byline: ELIZABETH MERAB
Body




Anti-acid Ranitidine, sold in Kenya as Neotack, withdrawn from the market after it was linked to cancer in the US.
The government has urged the public to stop taking anti-acid Ranitidine, sold in Kenya as Zantac or Neotack, to relieve heartburn.
The Pharmacy and Poisons Board withdrew the anti-acid from the market after it was linked to cancer in the US.
Last week, the board issued a directive to pharmacies across the country to retrieve and quarantine all Ranitidine products sold in the Kenyan market. Some wholesalers have written to their clients to return all products purchased.
DRUG RECALL
"In order to safeguard the health of Kenyans, you are instructed to carry out a level 2 recall of all ranitidine products from the Kenan market.
"In addition, you are required to submit to the board the details of all the products that you have imported into the country in the last three years," the board's chief executive Dr Fred Siyoi said in a circular.
On September 13, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) announced that it had learned that some ranitidine medications, including those known by the brand name Zantac, contain low levels of N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), an impurity that could cause cancer. NDMA is a possible cancer-causing chemical linked to liver damage.
This week, the drug companies Novartis (through its generic division, Sandoz) and Apotex announced that they were recalling all of their generic ranitidine products sold in the US.
These announcements came after a Connecticut-based online pharmacy informed the FDA that it had detected NDMA in multiple ranitidine products under certain test conditions.
The nitrosamine impurity known as N-nitrosodimethylamine, or NDMA, has been classified as a probable human carcinogen based on lab tests, and this isn't the first time that it has been detected in a common medication.
CANCER RISK
Since last year, the FDA has been investigating NDMA and other impurities in blood pressure and heart failure medicines known as angiotensin receptor blockers or ARBs. Numerous recalls have been launched as the FDA found "unacceptable levels" of nitrosamines in several of those common drugs containing valsartan.
A study published last year in the medical journal BMJ found no "markedly increased short term overall risk of cancer" among users of the valsartan drugs contaminated with NDMA. Yet that study also noted that research into long-term cancer risk is needed, CNN reports. 
http://imgs.syndigate.info/338/1144/18/157002024881.jpeg
Packages of Zantac, a popular medication which decreases stomach acid production and prevents heartburn. The medicine has been withdrawn from the Kenyan market. PHOTO | DREW ANGERER | GETTY IMAGES | AFP
 Load-Date: October 2, 2019

 

End of Document


FDA To Propose Mandatory Recall Authority For Drug-Like Supplements
Inside Health Policy
May 3, 2019

 Copyright 2019 Inside Washington Publishers All Rights Reserved
Length: 931 words
Body




 May 02, 2019 FDA plans to send a legislative proposal to Congress that would subject all dietary supplements to FDA's food enforcement authorities, even if the product does not meet the technical definition of a dietary supplement. The proposal would give FDA authority to mandate recalls of supplements that contain active drug ingredients and to gather information on marketed supplements.
An agency spokesperson said the proposal, which is summarized in FDA's fiscal 2020 budget justification, would authorize FDA to require a listing of individual supplements on the market.
According to the justification document, that listing would provide FDA with a mechanism for compiling basic information about the listed products and allow the agency to take action against non-compliant products and dangerous or otherwise illegal products.
FDA's move comes as a prominent consumer group raises concerns that FDA is not extending its current dietary supplement recall authority to supplements containing active pharmaceutical ingredients. Sandra Eskin, project director for food safety at Pew Charitable Trusts, explained in an April 23 blog that FDA treats drugs differently than food in terms of recall authority.
While FDA has authority to order a recall of dietary supplements, the agency does not have that authority for most drug products, she said. The agency can only request voluntary recalls of drugs.
"The agency's current policy is that since it cannot mandate a drug recall, it cannot mandate a recall of a supplement that contains a drug ingredient," Eskin writes in her blog. "This interpretation, however, undermines consumer health and safety and should be changed, by legislation if necessary."
Eskin argues that FDA could take administrative action to fix the problem. FDA is bound by only its interpretation of section 423 of the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. The section was updated in 2011 by the Food Safety Modernization Act, which gave FDA authority to order a recall of a food--including supplements--if the food is adulterated or misbranded and could lead to serious adverse health consequences or death to humans or animals.
But FDA disagrees with Eskin's assertion that the agency could treat all dietary supplements as within FDA's food authorities, even if the supplements include drug ingredients. An FDA spokesperson maintained that the agency does not have authority under the law to do so. But the spokesperson told Inside Health Policy that FDA plans to draft a legislative proposal that would provide such authority.
Specifically, the budget justification says the proposal would require all supplements to be listed with FDA and give FDA authority to act against non-compliant products and the manufacturers and/or distributors of such products. The listing would allow FDA to know when new products are introduced and act against dangerous or otherwise illegal products.
Former FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb said in February that he hoped to start a "public conversation" about beefing up the agency's oversight of supplements and reforming the agency's authority in the space. Among the changes he proposed was a renewed commitment to enforcing requirements that FDA be notified of new dietary ingredients.
The FDA spokesperson explained the legislative proposal would make any product marked as a dietary supplement subject to FDA's food enforcement authorities, even if the product did not meet the technical definition of a dietary supplement. For example, this would extend to a supplement containing an excluded drug ingredient, the spokesperson said.
Eskin told IHP that she welcomed such a proposal. While she still believesFDA already has the authority to recall supplements with drug ingredients, "what's important is FDA is intending to fix the problem," she said.
The food safety project director spent much of her blog post describing that problem. She pointed out a wave of recent supplements containing drug ingredients that have sent many consumers to the hospital. She referred to several supplements that claim to help with weight loss, sexual enhancement and athletic performance.
For example, in January an FDA analysis of the weight loss supplement GoLean Detox showed the product contained sibutramine and phenolphthalein. Sibutramine is a controlled substance that was removed from the market in 2010 and is known to cause heart problems. Meanwhile, phenolphthalein was once used in laxatives, but is no longer approved for marketing due to concerns of carcinogenicity.
The supplement manufacturer, GoLean Detox USA, recalled its product voluntarily in February. But Eskin pointed out the product is described as a perfect choice for nursing mothers on the company website. GoLean is still advertising the product on Instagram.
"We didn't recall our product," the company posted on April 15, along with a picture of the FDA's online posting about the recall. "Someone faked the company and send a letter to recall our tea. We have contact FDA and have the fake email and phone number here. !!"
Eskin pointed out that, since March 2015, FDA has issued warnings about 195 supplements marketed for sexual enhancement that contain the active ingredients found in drugs like Viagra and Cialis. Supplements for athletic performance sometimes include steroids or an amphetamine derivative called DMAA, the expert added.
"The (unlawful) presence of an active pharmaceutical ingredient in a supplement product that is marketed as a 'dietary supplement' should not transform the supplement into a drug," Eskin wrote to IHP. -- David Roza (droza@iwpnews.com)
 Load-Date: May 3, 2019

 

End of Document


FDA eyeing immediate hypertension drug recall
The Manila Times
May 10, 2019 Friday

 Copyright 2019 The Manila Times All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 231 words
Byline: Catherine Modesto
Body




Philippine regulators are considering an immediate recall of an anti-hypertension drug, Losartan Potassium + Hydrochlorothiazide, which is being pulled out of shelves in the United States for containing a possibly cancerous substance.
The Food and Drug Administration of the Philippines (FDA) is currently monitoring the situation and coordinating with the Market Authorization Holder (MAH) for the recall pending confirmation of the safety risk, FDA Director General Nela Charade Puno said in a statement.
Losartan Potassium + Hydrochlorothiazide is prescribed to hypertension patients whose blood pressure cannot be controlled on either losartan or hydrochlorothiazide alone, Puno noted.
He warned the public anew against using the drug, particularly if manufactured by Lek Pharmaceuticals dd, Ljubljana of Slovenia. Lot JB8912 is being voluntarily recalled by pharmaceutical company Sandoz Inc.
"For everyone's protection, I am calling on the public to report the sale or distribution of the subject drug product despite the issuance of this advisory. Kindly email us via report@fda.gov.ph," Puno said.
The active pharmaceutical ingredient, losartan, was manufactured by Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceuticals Co. Ltd. in Linhai, China. It was found to contain trace amount of the impurity, N-nitrosodiethylamine, which the World Health Organization has classified as a "probable human carcinogen."
 Load-Date: May 11, 2020

 

End of Document


FDA To Propose Mandatory Recall Authority For Drug-Like Supplements
FDA Week
May 3, 2019

 Copyright 2019 Inside Washington Publishers All Rights Reserved
Length: 931 words
Body




 May 02, 2019 FDA plans to send a legislative proposal to Congress that would subject all dietary supplements to FDA's food enforcement authorities, even if the product does not meet the technical definition of a dietary supplement. The proposal would give FDA authority to mandate recalls of supplements that contain active drug ingredients and to gather information on marketed supplements.
An agency spokesperson said the proposal, which is summarized in FDA's fiscal 2020 budget justification, would authorize FDA to require a listing of individual supplements on the market.
According to the justification document, that listing would provide FDA with a mechanism for compiling basic information about the listed products and allow the agency to take action against non-compliant products and dangerous or otherwise illegal products.
FDA's move comes as a prominent consumer group raises concerns that FDA is not extending its current dietary supplement recall authority to supplements containing active pharmaceutical ingredients. Sandra Eskin, project director for food safety at Pew Charitable Trusts, explained in an April 23 blog that FDA treats drugs differently than food in terms of recall authority.
While FDA has authority to order a recall of dietary supplements, the agency does not have that authority for most drug products, she said. The agency can only request voluntary recalls of drugs.
"The agency's current policy is that since it cannot mandate a drug recall, it cannot mandate a recall of a supplement that contains a drug ingredient," Eskin writes in her blog. "This interpretation, however, undermines consumer health and safety and should be changed, by legislation if necessary."
Eskin argues that FDA could take administrative action to fix the problem. FDA is bound by only its interpretation of section 423 of the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. The section was updated in 2011 by the Food Safety Modernization Act, which gave FDA authority to order a recall of a food--including supplements--if the food is adulterated or misbranded and could lead to serious adverse health consequences or death to humans or animals.
But FDA disagrees with Eskin's assertion that the agency could treat all dietary supplements as within FDA's food authorities, even if the supplements include drug ingredients. An FDA spokesperson maintained that the agency does not have authority under the law to do so. But the spokesperson told Inside Health Policy that FDA plans to draft a legislative proposal that would provide such authority.
Specifically, the budget justification says the proposal would require all supplements to be listed with FDA and give FDA authority to act against non-compliant products and the manufacturers and/or distributors of such products. The listing would allow FDA to know when new products are introduced and act against dangerous or otherwise illegal products.
Former FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb said in February that he hoped to start a "public conversation" about beefing up the agency's oversight of supplements and reforming the agency's authority in the space. Among the changes he proposed was a renewed commitment to enforcing requirements that FDA be notified of new dietary ingredients.
The FDA spokesperson explained the legislative proposal would make any product marked as a dietary supplement subject to FDA's food enforcement authorities, even if the product did not meet the technical definition of a dietary supplement. For example, this would extend to a supplement containing an excluded drug ingredient, the spokesperson said.
Eskin told IHP that she welcomed such a proposal. While she still believesFDA already has the authority to recall supplements with drug ingredients, "what's important is FDA is intending to fix the problem," she said.
The food safety project director spent much of her blog post describing that problem. She pointed out a wave of recent supplements containing drug ingredients that have sent many consumers to the hospital. She referred to several supplements that claim to help with weight loss, sexual enhancement and athletic performance.
For example, in January an FDA analysis of the weight loss supplement GoLean Detox showed the product contained sibutramine and phenolphthalein. Sibutramine is a controlled substance that was removed from the market in 2010 and is known to cause heart problems. Meanwhile, phenolphthalein was once used in laxatives, but is no longer approved for marketing due to concerns of carcinogenicity.
The supplement manufacturer, GoLean Detox USA, recalled its product voluntarily in February. But Eskin pointed out the product is described as a perfect choice for nursing mothers on the company website. GoLean is still advertising the product on Instagram.
"We didn't recall our product," the company posted on April 15, along with a picture of the FDA's online posting about the recall. "Someone faked the company and send a letter to recall our tea. We have contact FDA and have the fake email and phone number here. !!"
Eskin pointed out that, since March 2015, FDA has issued warnings about 195 supplements marketed for sexual enhancement that contain the active ingredients found in drugs like Viagra and Cialis. Supplements for athletic performance sometimes include steroids or an amphetamine derivative called DMAA, the expert added.
"The (unlawful) presence of an active pharmaceutical ingredient in a supplement product that is marketed as a 'dietary supplement' should not transform the supplement into a drug," Eskin wrote to IHP. -- David Roza (droza@iwpnews.com)
 Load-Date: May 3, 2019

 

End of Document


A flurry of drug recalls hits Indian pharma firms in US
DNA
January 9, 2019 Wednesday

 Copyright 2019 Diligent Media Corporation Ltd., DNA (Daily News & Analysis), distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 841 words
Byline: DNA Money Correspondent
Body




                                              Torrent Pharmaceuticals, Aurobindo, Indian unit of Mylan among cos recalling drugs for various impurities 
Indian generic drug manufacturers continue to recall high blood pressure medicines from the US market after the key ingredients used in the drugs were detected with probable cancer causing impurity.
In a latest, Ahmedabad-based Torrent Pharmaceuticals said it is expanding its voluntary recall of hypertension drug Losartan potassium tablets USP to a total of 10 lots due to detection of trace amounts of an unexpected impurity, N-nitrosodiethylamine (NDEA), found in an active pharmaceutical ingredient (API). Earlier in December, it initiated a voluntary recall of two lots for similar reason. The API was manufactured by Hetero Labs Ltd.
According to US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the impurity NDEA, a substance that occurs naturally in certain foods, drinking water, air pollution and industrial processes, has been classified as a probable human carcinogen as per International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) classification.
The recall is at the consumer level, and Torrent is only recalling lots of Losartan-containing products that contain NDEA above the acceptable daily intake levels released by the FDA. The recall is for products which are above the interim acceptable intake level of 0.27 parts per million. In August last year, Torrent also recalled around 109 lots of Valsartan, and in combination with amlodipine or amlodipine plus hydrochlorothiazide in the US due to detection of trace amounts of another probable human carcinogen, N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), in an API manufactured by Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceuticals. The medicines are used for controlling high blood pressure.
Recently, Aurobindo Pharma initiated a similar recall of 80 lots of Valsartan. In October, it pulled off 22 lots of another high blood pressure medicine Irbesartan voluntarily after it was tested positive for NDEA.
Not just Indian firms, blood pressure medicines manufactured by multinationals were also found with trace amounts of the two probable human carcinogens.
Teva Pharmaceuticals, Mylan Pharmaceuticals, Sandoz, ScieGen Pharmaceuticals, Camber Pharmaceuticals, Major Pharmaceuticals and Prinston Pharmaceutical have recalled blood pressure drugs in the US, after the impurity NDEA/NDMA were detected in their key ingredients used to manufacture the finished products.
The APIs contained in many of these finished products are manufactured in China and India.
Last month, the US agency in a press statement said that NDMA and NDEA are probable human carcinogens and should not be present in drug products. "We are currently aware of NDMA and NDEA in certain valsartan, irbesartan and losartan-containing products, and those products and some active pharmaceutical ingredients used to manufacture them have been recalled from the US market. Drug products that contain NDMA or NDEA above the limits in the table below pose an unacceptable risk to patients."
Taking note of this, drug regulators in the UK, Europe, Japan and Canada have also increased their scrutiny on drugs likely to be contaminated with NDEA or NDMA.
In October last year, the European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines & Healthcare (EDQM) suspended Aurobindo Pharma's CEP (a certificate of compliance with European standards for quality testing), effectively stopping the supply in the EU of medicines containing Irbesartan from the company.
In November, it issued a statement saying that EDQM has suspended Mylan Laboratories Ltd's CEP, effectively prohibiting the use of Valsartan in EU medicines, after some batches of Valsartan made by the company in Hyderabad were found to contain NDEA.
"The presence of impurities in Valsartan medicines and other sartans is thought to be linked to the synthesis of a specific ring structure (tetrazole) which is present in some sartan medicines.
Companies marketing sartan medicines in the EU have been asked to test their products for these impurities. Additional testing is being carried out by EU laboratories," the European Medicines Agency (EMA) said recently," EMA had said in its statement in November.
According to an analyst, who does not wish to be named, this may not immediately have any significant financial impact on the companies recalling drugs in the US, but companies, whose APIs were detected with the impurity, must review their manufacturing practices.
He, however, said that the outcome of the impurities is unintentional as it may have caused due to changes made in the manufacturing process of APIs.
Meanwhile, Lupin Pharmaceuticals, Inc has also initiated voluntary recall 42 lots of Ceftriaxone for Injection, USP, at hospital/ physician level since the products have been found to contain visual grey particulate matter in reconstituted vials.Bitter dose
Torrent Pharma is expanding its voluntary recall of hypertension drug Losartan potassium tablets USP
Recently, Hyderabad-based Aurobindo Pharma initiated a similar recall of 80 lots of Valsartan
 Load-Date: January 9, 2019

 

End of Document


Torrent Pharma Expands Recall Of BP Drug Losartan For Cancer Risk
Pharma & Healthcare Monitor Worldwide
September 25, 2019 Wednesday

 Copyright 2019 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 281 words
Body




Torrent Pharmaceuticals Limited expanded the recall for many batches of high blood pressure drug Losartan Potassium, citing potential cancer risk.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration said the recall involved an additional 3 lots of Losartan Potassium Tablets USP and 2 lots of Losartan Potassium / hydrochlorothiazide tablets, USP.
Torrent noted that trace amounts of N-Methylnitrosobutyric acid or NMBA, a probable carcinogen, was detected while testing the finished products. The company is only recalling lots of losartan-containing products that contain NMBA above the acceptable daily intake levels released by the FDA.
The affected products were manufactured utilizing active pharmaceutical ingredient or API manufactured by Hetero Labs Limited.
The tablets were distributed nationwide to Torrent's wholesale distributor, repackager and retail customers.
The company urged the patients who are taking Losartan Potassium to continue the medication and also to contact their pharmacist or physician.
Losartan is used to treat hypertension, hypertensive patients with Left Ventricular Hypertrophy and for the treatment of nephropathy in Type 2 diabetic patients.
Torrent had earlier recalled several lots of Losartan for containing another carcinogen N-nitrosodiethylamine or NDEA.
In the past, many drug companies have recalled hundreds of lots of the blood pressure and heart medications valsartan, losartan and irbesartan after tests found that the drugs had trace amounts of carcinogens.
Macleods Pharmaceuticals Limited in June had recalled 32 lots of Losartan due to the presence of NMBA. Losartan ingredient manufacturer Hetero Labs was also linked to the recall. 2019 Global Data Point.
 Load-Date: September 25, 2019

 

End of Document


FDA eyeing immediate hypertension drug recall
Manila Times (Philippines)
May 10, 2019 Friday

 Copyright 2019 News Bites Pty Ltd. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 240 words
Byline: CATHERINE MODESTO
Body




SOURCED FROM CURRENT GLOBAL NEWSPAPERS AND JOURNALS
Philippine regulators are considering an immediate recall of an anti-hypertension drug, Losartan Potassium + Hydrochlorothiazide, which is being pulled out of shelves in the United States for containing a possibly cancerous substance.
The Food and Drug Administration of the Philippines (FDA) is currently monitoring the situation and coordinating with the Market Authorization Holder (MAH) for the recall pending confirmation of the safety risk, FDA Director General Nela Charade Puno said in a statement.
Losartan Potassium + Hydrochlorothiazide is prescribed to hypertension patients whose blood pressure cannot be controlled on either losartan or hydrochlorothiazide alone, Puno noted.
He warned the public anew against using the drug, particularly if manufactured by Lek Pharmaceuticals dd, Ljubljana of Slovenia. Lot JB8912 is being voluntarily recalled by pharmaceutical company Sandoz Inc.
"For everyone's protection, I am calling on the public to report the sale or distribution of the subject drug product despite the issuance of this advisory. Kindly email us via report@fda.gov.ph," Puno said.
The active pharmaceutical ingredient, losartan, was manufactured by Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceuticals Co. Ltd. in Linhai, China. It was found to contain trace amount of the impurity, N-nitrosodiethylamine, which the World Health Organization has classified as a "probable human carcinogen."
 Load-Date: May 9, 2019

 

End of Document


Pfizer recalls drug from US
The Economic Times
November 11, 2010 Thursday

 Copyright 2010 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: PHARMACEUTICALS
Length: 435 words
Byline: Khomba Singh
Body




NEW DELHI: PFIZER has recalled a drug made by an Indian partner from the US market while another local partner of the world's largest drugmaker received a warning from the American drug regulator for violating manufacturing norms.
Pfizer recalled three batches - about 2,000 bottles - of Albon, a bacterial infection drug for animals, after an investigation found the presence of Penicillium Chrysogenum in some samples, according to the US FDA website. The drugs made by the Pune-based Emcure Pharmaceuticals were to expire in November 2014 and February 2015. The recall is classified under FDA's Class III recall, which means the use of the medicine is not likely to cause adverse health conditions. Emcure officials could not be contacted for comments. Pfizer did not reply to a query from ET.
This closely follows a warning letter from the FDA to Ahmedabad-based Claris Lifesciences for violating manufacturing norms at its Ahmedabad plant. Pfizer markets a few injectibles made at this plant in its home market. During an inspection in June, the FDA found several manufacturing lapses, which the company has failed to address adequately, the regulator said in the warning letter issued on November 1.
Earlier this year, Pfizer and Sagent Pharmaceuticals had voluntarily recalled metronidazole, ciprofloxacin and ondansetron IV Products due to the presence of some floating matter. FDA said the Indian company's response in identifying the cause of the problem and addressing consumer complaints has not been satisfactory. Last year, Pfizer and Claris Lifesciences inked a deal under which Pfizer would market about 15 of its products in regulated markets of North America, Europe and Australia.
The FDA has asked the Indian company to stop selling ciprofloxacin, metronidazole, ondansetron, fluconazole and levofloxacin made at the plant until it resolves the issue. A person familiar with the development said it will not have a major financial impact on the Indian company as its US business contributes just 10% of its `800 crore annual sales. "There will be no impact on Claris' tie-up with Pfizer or the proposed IPO. The company expects to resolve the matter in the next six months," he said, seeking anonymity, given the sensitive nature of the issue.
Claris Lifesciences, in the process of raising `300 crore through its maiden public issue, declined comment. The development would adversely impact the IPO as investors would be wary of buying company's shares until the issues are resolved, said Ranjit Kapadia, VP, Institutional Research at brokerage HDFC securities.
For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com
 Load-Date: November 10, 2010

 

End of Document


Torrent Pharma Expands Recall Of BP Drug Losartan For Cancer Risk
RTT News (United States)
September 23, 2019 Monday

 Copyright 2019 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2019 RTT News All Rights Reserved
Length: 281 words
Byline: editorial@rttnews.com,  (RTT Staff Writer)
Body




       Torrent Pharmaceuticals Limited expanded the recall for many batches of high blood pressure drug Losartan Potassium, citing potential cancer risk.

 The U.S. Food and Drug Administration said the recall involved an additional 3 lots of Losartan Potassium Tablets USP and 2 lots of Losartan Potassium / hydrochlorothiazide tablets, USP.

 Torrent noted that trace amounts of N-Methylnitrosobutyric acid or NMBA, a probable carcinogen, was detected while testing the finished products. The company is only recalling lots of losartan-containing products that contain NMBA above the acceptable daily intake levels released by the FDA.

 The affected products were manufactured utilizing active pharmaceutical ingredient or API manufactured by Hetero Labs Limited.

 The tablets were distributed nationwide to Torrent's wholesale distributor, repackager and retail customers. 

 The company urged the patients who are taking Losartan Potassium to continue the medication and also to contact their pharmacist or physician.

 Losartan is used to treat hypertension, hypertensive patients with Left Ventricular Hypertrophy and for the treatment of nephropathy in Type 2 diabetic patients.

 Torrent had earlier recalled several lots of Losartan for containing another carcinogen N-nitrosodiethylamine or NDEA.

 In the past, many drug companies have recalled hundreds of lots of the blood pressure and heart medications valsartan, losartan and irbesartan after tests found that the drugs had trace amounts of carcinogens.

 Macleods Pharmaceuticals Limited in June had recalled 32 lots of Losartan due to the presence of NMBA. Losartan ingredient manufacturer Hetero Labs was also linked to the recall.        
 Load-Date: September 24, 2019

 

End of Document


DDA mulls recalling or banning Valsartan drugs
My Republica
January 15, 2019 Tuesday

 Copyright 2019 Nepal Republic Media Pvt. Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Length: 474 words
Dateline: KATHMANDU 
Body




KATHMANDU, Jan. 15 -- The Department of Drug Administration (DDA), the apex drugs regulating body, has started discussing how to control the controversial Valsartan drugs, which are used by hypertension and heart patients. The authority is discussing whether to recall the drugs or ban them altogether.
During a meeting at the DDA on Monday, officials raised serious concerns over the possible negative impact of Valsartan drugs on patients and their presence in the Nepali market. "We held a serious discussion on the issue today," said Santosh KC, senior drugs administrator at the DDA.
KC said they will assess the supply and availability of the medicines in the market. "Then we will decide whether to recall or ban the controversial medicine," said KC.
He further said that if the Valsartan medicines are still being sold in the market then the DDA can recall them. "But to ban the medicines, the decision has to be made by an advisory council headed by the health minister. We will take necessary decision within a couple of days," he said.
While several Valsartan drugs used by hypertension (high blood pressure) and heart patients have already been recalled in various countries including the US and Gulf countries because of some impurities in the key ingredient, they are still being sold in Nepal.
The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has classified some Valsartan medicines as "probably human carcinogen'' after those medicines were found containing the chemical N-nitrosodiethylamine (NDMA), which can cause cancer in humans. NDMA may also cause damage to liver.
Even several months since an international ban, Valsartan medicines are still being produced and sold by Nepali pharmaceutical companies. Valzaar manufactured by the Indian Torrent Pharmaceuticals is registered with the DDA and is distributed by Pharmachem Pvt Ltd in Nepal, according to the details provided by the DDA.
According to the DDA, 99 products of Amlodipine Valsartan, including 63 domestic and others mostly Indian, are registered with the DDA. Similarly, 23 items of Valsartan HCTZ including 21 domestic and two Indian are registered with the DDA.
However, the state-owned National Medicines Laboratory (NML) under the DDA, the apex body for drugs management, is not quite up to the task of monitoring quality properly, according to officials. The government established NML in 2001 to examine the quality of medicines. Drug testing labs must be of at least BSL (bio-safety level) III standard. However, NML hardly meets the BSL I standard, according to DDA officials.
"Our lab is not sophisticated enough to carry out extensive research on medicines," KC said.
Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Republica. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
 Load-Date: January 14, 2019

 

End of Document


Lupin, Cadila Healthcare recall drugs in US
Global Data Point
December 8, 2017 Friday

 Copyright 2017 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. (Syndigate.info) All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 245 words
Body




Drug firms Lupin and Cadila Healthcare are recalling nearly 1.11 lakh units of Duloxetine delayed-release capsules and 19,812 bottles of Paroxetine tablets, respectively, from the US market, the US health regulator has said.
Lupin Pharmaceuticals is recalling 1,11,648 units of Duloxetine delayed-release capsules USP, in the strength of 30 mg, on account of failed dissolution specification, the United States Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) said in its latest Enforcement Report.
The drug was manufactured by Lupin Goa, the report added.
The ongoing voluntary nationwide recall is a class III recall, it said.
Zydus Pharmaceuticals USA Inc, arm of Cadila Healthcare, is also recalling 19,812 bottles of Paroxetine tablets in the strength of 30 mg from the US market.
The reason for the ongoing voluntary nationwide recall is "presence of foreign tablets/capsules: Risperidone tablets were found in bottle of Paroxetine tablets", the report stated.
The product was manufactured by Cadila Healthcare and the recall is a class II recall, the regulator added.
A class II recall is initiated in a "situation in which use of or exposure to a violative product may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences or where the probability of serious adverse health consequences is remote".
A class III recall, on the other hand, kicks in where use of or exposure to a violative product is not likely to cause adverse health consequences. 2017 Global Data Point.
 Load-Date: December 8, 2017

 

End of Document


Mylan must recall drugs made by Endo
FiercePharma Manufacturing
December 20, 2012 Thursday

 Copyright 2012 Questex Media Group LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 285 words
Byline: Eric Palmer
Body




Mylan ($MYL) has gotten caught up in manufacturing problems at the generics operation of Endo Health Solutions (           $ENDP), forcing it to recall three lots of generic Vicodin.
The company announced today that it was recalling the lots of hydrocodone bitartrate and acetaminophen tablets, USP 10 mg/500 mg made by Endo's Qualitest Pharmaceuticals and repackaged by Mylan. The pills are considered "super potent" because they potentially exceed their prescribed weights.
Endo's issues first surfaced in September, when it recalled one lot of drugs for falling outside weight parameters. Earlier this month it added 100 more lots to the recall. Mylan's recall includes only pills labeled as having 10 milligrams of hydrocodone bitartrate and 500 milligrams of acetaminophen, the active ingredient in Tylenol.
The FDA posted Endo's updated recall to its website warning that liver damage resulting from too much acetaminophen can be lethal. No deaths or problems have surfaced, but the agency pointed out that the danger is particularly acute for anyone "who consumes more than 3 alcoholic beverages a day."
   
   Endo last week downgraded its earnings prospects for this year and next at the same time that it announced that its CEO will retire by May. The company said David P. Holveck, 67, president and CEO, will leave when a successor is named or at the company's annual meeting in May, whichever is earlier. He also will leave the board. Endo said it will look at candidates inside and outside the company.
- here's the release
   - get            more from Reuters
Related Articles:
   Endo revises pain drug recall from 1 to 101
              Endo recalls potentially 'super potent' painkillers
              Endo revises earnings picture, says CEO to retire
 Load-Date: April 30, 2013

 

End of Document


Torrent Pharma expands recall of hypertension drug in US
Dion Global Solutions Limited
September 23, 2019 Monday

 Copyright 2019 Dion Global Solutions Limited All Rights Reserved
Length: 285 words
Dateline: India 
Body




India, Sept. 23 -- Drug firm Torrent Pharmaceuticals is expanding its voluntary recall for tablets used to control hypertension in the US due to detection of traces of N-Methylnitrosobutyric acid, according to health regulator USFDA.
The company is expanding recall for Losartan potassium tablets USP and Losartan potassium / hydrochlorothiazide tablets to the consumer level due to the detection of trace amounts of an unexpected impurity while testing some finished product batches manufactured utilising active pharmaceutical ingredient manufactured by Hetero Labs, Torrent Pharmaceuticals said in an announcement posted on the website of USFDA.
"The recall is expanded to include an additional three lots of Losartan potassium tablets USP and 2 lots of Losartan potassium/hydrochlorothiazide tablets, USP," it added.
The impurity detected is N-Methylnitrosobutyric acid (NMBA), the statement said.
Torrent is only recalling lots of losartan-containing products that contain N-Methylnitrosobutyric acid (NMBA) above the acceptable daily intake levels released by the FDA, it added.
According to the regulator, the impurity is a known animal and potential human carcinogen.
"Losartan is used to treat hypertension, hypertensive patients with Left Ventricular Hypertrophy and for the treatment of nephropathy in Type 2 diabetic patients. Losartan Potassium and Hydrochlorothiazide tablets, USP is used to treat hypertension and hypertensive patients with Left Ventricular Hypertrophy," it added.
Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Dion Global Solutions Limited. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
 Load-Date: October 7, 2019

 

End of Document


Making sense of the recent blood pressure drug recalls
Medical Xpress
March 8, 2019 Friday 4:20 PM EST

 Copyright 2019 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 1183 words
Body




Mar 08, 2019( Medical Xpress: http://medicalxpress.com Delivered by Newstex)  (HealthDay)—People taking blood pressure medications have faced a frightening and bewildering series of pharmaceutical recalls in recent months, as trace amounts of cancer-causing chemicals have been discovered in individual batches of drugs. But experts from the nation's leading heart groups are urging patients to remain calm, even as the recall list continues to grow. The trace amounts of carcinogens being found in these drugs don't appear to pose an immediate cancer risk, and there are plenty of other medications on the market to help keep your blood pressure[1] under control, said Craig Beavers. He is a member of the American College of Cardiology (ACC) Cardiovascular Team Council. 
The recalls center around generic versions of angiotensin II receptor blocker (ARB) drugs. Losartan, valsartan and irbesartan are the ARB drugs for which specific lots have been recalled. "Medications in the ARB class are used primarily for hypertension and for heart failure[2], and the good news is there are a lot of other alternatives," said Beavers, an assistant professor with the University of Kentucky College of Pharmacy. Concerned patients should talk to their doctor or pharmacist about transitioning to an alternative, said Dr. Robert Carey. He is an American Heart Association (AHA) spokesman and co-lead for high blood pressure guidelines issued jointly by the AHA and ACC. Most importantly, people should not just stop taking their blood pressure medications. "If that happens, then you may get a rebound increase in blood pressure, which could put you at risk for having a cardiovascular event. You don't want to do that," said Carey, a professor and dean emeritus of the University of Virginia School of Medicine. Hundreds of Drug Lots Recalled in Past Year Since last summer, drug companies[3] have recalled hundreds of lots of ARB drugs after testing revealed small amounts of cancer-causing chemicals in the tablets. ARB drugs lower blood pressure by relaxing the blood vessels, making it easier for your heart to pump blood. The chemical contaminants affecting generic ARBs all belong to a class known as nitrosamines. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration suspects the impurities are occurring due to specific chemicals or reactions in the manufacturing process, or from the reuse of materials such as solvents.Last week alone, two ARB drug[4] recalls occurred. Camber Pharmaceuticals recalled 87 lots of losartan potassium tablets last Friday because they contain N-Nitroso-N-methyl-4-aminobutyric acid (NMBA), a known animal and potential human carcinogen. The lots were manufactured in India. It was the first time NMBA had been found as a contaminant in an ARB drug. Previously, two other nitrosamines, N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) and N-nitrosodiethylamine (NDEA), had been found in products containing valsartan, losartan and irbesartan. AurobindoPharma USA also initiated a voluntary recall last week of 38 lots of tablets containing valsartan, after detecting NDEA in those batches, the FDA said. The recall was an expansion of an earlier recall initiated in December. Doctors, Pharmacies Helping Patients Track Contaminated Meds Doctors say they've been getting a steady stream of questions from patients as the recall list grows. "It hasn't been an avalanche, but it's been a fair number of calls or emails to me," said Dr. Lawrence Krakoff, a cardiologist at Mount Sinai Hospital and a professor at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, in New York City. Pharmacies have been doing a good job tracking the recalled lots and reaching out to either patients or their doctors, Beavers said. People concerned about the ARB drug they're taking should go to a website the FDA has created to track all of the recalls, Krakoff said. They also can check with their pharmacy. You can also check on your losartan medication at the FDA's website on the drug[5]. The FDA has also posted separate lists for recalled valsartan[6] and irbesartan[7]. "If it turns out that it's a safe medication, there's no risk for them at all," Krakoff said. "If it is one of the companies with a potentially contaminated drug, I would recommend they switch with another generic drug that's identical." There are plenty of generic ARBs on the market, Beavers said. If your pharmacist can find another generic identical to the one you are taking, he or she could start you on the new drug without needing to contact your doctor. What to Do if Your Meds Have Been Recalled If an identical generic isn't available and you can't afford to pay brand-name prices, you should talk with your doctor about switching you to another blood pressure drug, the experts said. It doesn't necessarily have to be another ARB, either, Carey said. Another class of drugs called ACE inhibitors also act to relax the blood vessels through a different mechanism. "If the patient has not had previous side effects or untoward conditions related to an ACE inhibitor, you could stop the ARB and substitute an ACE inhibitor," Carey said. "There are a whole flock of ACE inhibitors also on the market." Even if they've gotten one of the contaminated lots, people should not be overly worried about their exposure to nitrosamines through their blood[8] pressure drugs, the experts added. Krakoff said, "I tell patients that if they've taken a few pills from a bad batch, they're likely to be completely safe." Beavers agreed. "At the current levels, they think the amount is low," Beavers said. "It's not great. You'd rather it be zero. But at the moment it's not concerning from the FDA's perspective." Explore further Second hypertension drug recalled due to contamination[9] More information: The Mayo Clinic has more about angiotensin II receptor blockers[10].Copyright  2019 HealthDay[11]. All rights reserved.Citation: Making sense of the recent blood pressure drug recalls (2019, March 8) retrieved 8 March 2019 from https://medicalxpress.com/news/2019-03-blood-pressure-drug-recalls.html This document is subject to copyright. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of private study or research, no part may be reproduced without the written permission. The content is provided for information purposes only. [ 1]:            https://medicalxpress.com/tags/blood+pressure/ [ 2]:            https://medicalxpress.com/tags/heart+failure/ [ 3]:            https://medicalxpress.com/tags/drug+companies/ [ 4]:            https://medicalxpress.com/tags/drug/ [ 5]:            https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/DrugSafety/UCM628993.pdf [ 6]:            https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/DrugSafety/UCM615703.pdf [ 7]:            https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/DrugSafety/UCM629626.pdf [ 8]:            https://medicalxpress.com/tags/blood/ [ 9]:            https://medicalxpress.com/news/2018-11-hypertension-drug-recalled-due-contamination.html [ 10]:            https://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/high-blood-pressure/in-depth/angiotensin-ii-receptor-blockers/art-20045009 [ 11]:            http://www.healthday.com/ 
 Load-Date: March 8, 2019

 

End of Document


Another recall involving blood pressure drugs announced
UPI
January 8, 2019 Tuesday 11:21 AM EST

 Copyright 2019 U.P.I. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 345 words
Byline: CLYDE HUGHES
Dateline: Jan. 8 
Body




Drug maker Torrent Pharmaceuticals Limited said that it is expanding its recall of Losartan potassium tablets because of the detection of trace amounts of N-nitrosodiethylamine, or NDEA, above the acceptable daily intake levels released recommended by the U.S. .
Torrent Pharmaceuticals said last week in a statement that it originally recalled two lots of the tablets in December, but the recall has now widened to 10 lots. The company said the "unexpected impurity" was found in an active pharmaceutical ingredient manufactured by Hetero Labs Limited.
The medication is used by patients to treat high blood pressure and diabetic kidney disease.
Last week, 80 lots of Amlodipine Valsartan Tablets USP, Valsartan HCTZ Tablets, USP and Valsartan Tablets USP were recalled because of the presence of NDEA.
In December, another recall included 104 lots of three medicines: valsartan tablets, combination tablets with the drugs valsartan and amlodipine, and combination tablets with valsartan and hydrochlorothiazide. NDEA is a possible carcinogen that can cause cancer.
"NDEA is a substance that occurs naturally in certain foods, drinking water, air pollution, and industrial processes, and has been classified as a probable human carcinogen as per International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) classification," the latest FDA statement said.
"To date, Torrent Pharmaceuticals Limited has not received any reports of adverse events related to this recall," the statement continued.
USA Today reported that drugs involved in the recall are all part of a large class of drugs called angiotensin II receptor blockers, which work by blocking the effects of a hormone that narrows blood vessels.
Such drugs, and a second class called angiotensin converting-enzyme inhibitors, or ACE inhibitors, are typically the first ones prescribed by physicians to lower a patient's blood pressure.
Consumers should also contact their physician or health care provider if they have experienced any problems that may be related to taking or using this drug product, Torrent and the FDA release said.
 Load-Date: January 9, 2019

 

End of Document


India: In America, Ranbaxy recalls drug
Daily the Pak Banker
April 18, 2010 Sunday

 Copyright 2010 Right Vision News All Rights Reserved
Length: 253 words
Dateline: New Delhi 
Body




New Delhi, April 18 -- Ranbaxy Laboratories today said its US subsidiary is voluntarily recalling two lots of an antibiotic drug from the American market after receiving certain complaints about them.
According to our staff reporter, The recall is being carried out at the retail level and is being conducted with the full knowledge of the US health regulator Food and Drug Administration (FDA), it said. The company, however, declined to comment on the impact of the recall on its earnings, but according to industry experts, "it will be negligible."
India's US arm, Ranbaxy Pharmaceuticals Inc is conducting the recall after receiving a limited number of complaints about the drug, which is in powdered form, changing colours when mixed with water to make formulations.
"Ranbaxy Pharmaceuticals Inc, Jacksonville, Florida is conducting a voluntary recall of Amoxicillin and Clavulanate Potassium for Oral Suspension, which is limited to Lot No 1910779 and 1910782 with expiry of May 2010 that is currently available in the US market," Ranbaxy Laboratories said in a statement.
Based on a limited number of complaints from the US market that describe a change in colour of the product on reconstitution, the company has decided to recall all the lots in question as a matter of caution, given its commitment to the health and safety of patients, it added. Published by HT Syndication with permission from Daily Pak Banker. For more information on news feed please contact Sarabjit Jagirdar at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com
For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com
 Load-Date: April 19, 2010

 

End of Document


Jubilant Arm Recalls Drug from US Over 'Minor Discrepancies'
Economic Times (E-Paper Edition)
May 21, 2013 Tuesday
Mumbai Edition

 Copyright 2013 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: CORPORATE
Length: 340 words
Byline: SOMA DAS NEW DELHI
Body




Jubilant Cadista,a US-based subsidiary of Jubilant Lifesciences,a top Indian drug firm specialising in contract research and manufacturing services,has recalled its drug Pantoprazole Sodium (delayed release) from the US market.The drug was manufactured at Jubilant's India facility at Roorkee and was pulled out for possible deviations from prescribed good manufacturing practices,according to a May enforcement report of the US Food and Drug Administration (US FDA).The US FDA cites the reason of recall as "cGMP deviations,oral products were not manufactured in accordance with good manufacturing practices".The drug Pantoprazole is used for shortterm treatment of erosion and ulceration of the oesophagus caused by gastroesophageal reflux disease.A company spokesperson confirmed the recall.The recall has been classified as class II,which means use of or exposure to the violative product may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences or where the probability of serious adverse health consequences is remote.The US drug regulator grades drugs recalls into three categories,with class I being the most severe and class III being the mildest.Jubilant's nationwide pull-out of affected lots in US is a voluntary recall,initiated by the firm.Drug recalls in the US market may happen at company's own initiatives,or when requested or ordered by the US drug regulator."In January 2013,we voluntarily recalled two batches of Pantoprazole 40 mg tablets from the US market following some minor cosmetic discrepancies that came to our notice," said a company spokesperson."Upon testing,the rest of the batches of the tablets were found to be meeting all the quality parameters as per the approved regulatory specifications.We have subsequently continued to ship this product to the US market where we are witnessing a good demand," she added.This recall affects only two batches,set to expire in May 2014.This means the recall is not likely to have any significant material impact on the company owing to its small size.
 Load-Date: May 20, 2013

 

End of Document


GOVERNOR CUOMO SIGNS LEGISLATION REQUIRING PHARMACIES TO NOTIFY PATIENTS OF CLASS I DRUG RECALLS WITHIN SEVEN DAYS
States News Service
October 18, 2019 Friday

 Copyright 2019 States News Service
Length: 443 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: ALBANY, NY 
Body




The following information was released by the New York State Office of Emergency Management (NYSOEM):
Drugs that are issued a Class I recall have a high probability of causing serious health consequences or death
Cuomo: "People deserve to know when a medication that's supposed to make them feel better may actually make them sicker, and it's common sense that pharmacies communicate that information to patients in real time. This measure will help ensure patients get the facts about a recalled drug quickly so they can talk to their doctor about safer alternatives."
WYSIWYG
Governor Andrew M. Cuomo today signed legislation (S.5091B/A.4781B) requiring pharmacies to inform patients of Class I drug recalls made by the FDA within seven days. Drugs that are issued a Class I recall have a high probability of causing serious adverse health consequences or death. The severity of health risks associated with the use of these recalled drugs is particularly high for elderly patients and those taking long-term medications. Currently there is no requirement for pharmacies to communicate this information to patients who have received the recalled drugs.
"People deserve to know when a medication that's supposed to make them feel better may actually make them sicker, and it's common sense that pharmacies communicate that information to patients in real time," Governor Cuomo said. "This measure will help ensure patients get the facts about a recalled drug quickly so they can talk to their doctor about safer alternatives."
This law takes effect immediately. The law requires pharmacies to contact patients by phone or mail.
Senator Leroy Comrie said, "Every year, the FDA recalls thousands of potentially harmful prescription and over the counter drugs, though countless consumers are never made aware that their medication may be putting their health in danger. This new consumer protection law will put the onus of responsibility for monitoring and informing patients of significant prescription drug recalls on the pharmacies distributing them, so timely and effective patient notification and consultation occurs at the neighborhood level. I thank Governor Cuomo and Assemblymember Daniel Rosenthal for recognizing the need for such accountability in the pharmaceutical industry."
Assembly Member Daniel Rosenthal said, "Pharmacies are often the last point of contact between a patient and their prescription. By enacting this legislation we reduce the likelihood of any New Yorker being exposed to harmful medication. I thank Senator Comrie and Governor Cuomo for their partnership in improving healthcare safety measures for countless patients and seniors."
 Load-Date: October 18, 2019

 

End of Document


Dr Reddys, Cipla arm recall drugs in US market; includes 7.8 lakh vials of injection used to treat low testosterone levels in men
Pharma & Healthcare Monitor Worldwide
April 29, 2019 Monday

 Copyright 2019 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 259 words
Body




Drug major Dr Reddys Laboratories is recalling 33,958 bottles of Divalproex Sodium Extended-Release tablets, used to treat seizure disorders, from the American market, as per a report by the US health regulator.
Besides, InvaGen Pharmaceuticals Inc, a subsidiary of Mumbai-based drug maker Cipla, is recalling over 7.8 lakh vials of Testosterone Cypionate injection, used to treat low testosterone levels in men.
Dr Reddys Laboratories Inc, a subsidiary of the Hyderabad-based Dr Reddys Laboratories, is voluntarily recalling the affected lot of bottles on account of certain deviations from the Current Good Manufacturing Practice (CGMP) regulations.
As per the latest enforcement report by the US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA), the firm is recalling the product as it has been exposed to above 50 per cent relative humidity levels during packaging operations.
The product was supplied to major distributors and retailers who may have further distributed the product throughout the US, the report added.
Meanwhile, InvaGen Pharmaceuticals Inc is recalling its product in various strengths due to the presence of particulate matter, the report said.
The vials were manufactured by Cipla at its Verna facility in Goa for Cipla USA Inc.
The USFDA has classified both the recalls as a Class-II recall, which is initiated in a situation in which use of or exposure to a violative product may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences or where the probability of serious adverse health consequences is remote. 2019 Global Data Point.
 Load-Date: April 29, 2019

 

End of Document


Pfizer Japan recalls high blood pressure drug over cancer-causing impurity
Yerepouni Daily News
February 11, 2019 Monday

 Copyright 2019 Yerepouni Daily News. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 208 words
Body




TOKYO (Reuters) - The Japanese subsidiary of Pfizer Inc is recalling a drug for high blood pressure which was found to contain a carcinogenic substance in its active ingredient valsartan, the drugmaker said on Friday.
More than 763,000 tablets of the drug Amvalo, manufactured from April to July in Mylan Laboratories Limited in India, are the subject of recall, Pfizer Japan Inc said in a statement, adding there were no reports of any damage to health.
"We will fully pay careful attention to our manufacturing and quality control to prevent a recurrence," Pfizer Japan President Akihisa Harada said.
Mylan NV said in November it would recall certain batches of blood pressure medicine valsartan in the United States after they were found to contain a probable cancer-causing impurity.
Chinese pharmaceutical ingredient manufacturer Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceuticals also said in July it would recall valsartan from consumers in the United States after finding traces of a probable carcinogen.
Last year, the Japanese Health Ministry asked pharmaceutical firms to check whether any of their drugs using valsartan contained any carcinogenic impurities.
Reporting by Takashi Umekawa; Editing by Alexander Smith
Our Standards:The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.
 Load-Date: February 11, 2019

 

End of Document


Affymax, Takeda Recall Anemia Drug
TheStreet.com
February 24, 2013 Sunday 17:05 PM EST

 Copyright 2013 TheStreet.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Section: NEWS & ANALYSIS; Drugs
Length: 202 words
Byline: The Associated Press, Guest Contributor
Copyright 2011 Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.
Body




WASHINGTON -- Drug companiesAffymax Inc.andTakeda Pharmaceutical Co.have issued a recall of their anemia drug Omontys after reports of severe allergic reactions in some kidney dialysis patients, including some deaths.The companies said that more than 25,000 patients have received Omontys, which is used against anemia in patients undergoing kidney dialysis.The companies said that 0.2% of the patients who have received the drug, or about 50, have reported severe allergic reactions and around 0.02% of patients, or about five, have died following their first dose of the drug.The serious hypersensitivity reactions occur within 30 minutes of the drug being administered for the first time. The companies said that no such reactions have been reported subsequent times that the drug is administered to a patient.The companies said that dialysis centers should stop using Omontys and that customers will be provided with instructions on how to return the product to the manufacturer for a refund. Customers with questions can call 1-855-466-6689 from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. EST Monday through Friday. The two companies said they were working with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration on the details of the recall.
 Load-Date: February 25, 2013

 

End of Document


Sun, Wockhardt recall drugs from US market
Philippines News Agency
August 30, 2015 Sunday

 Copyright 2015 Philippines News Agency All Rights Reserved
Length: 414 words
Dateline: HYDERABAD 
Body




HYDERABAD, Aug. 30 -- Sun Pharma and Wockhardt have separately initiated voluntary recall of a number of drugs from the US market due to different reasons.
Sun Pharma initiated voluntary recall of multiple lots of Bupropion Hydrochloride Extended-release Tablets USP (SR), 200 mg, 60-count bottle, from the US market for "failed dissolution specification", while Wockhardt started recalling its Lisinopril Tablets USP, 5 mg and 20 mg from the same market for "CGMP violations".
According to a notification issued by the US Food and Drug Administration, Sun Pharma's recall was initiated last month under Class-III classification which was as 'a situation in which use of or exposure to a violative product is not likely to cause adverse health consequences'.
Bupropion is an antidepressant used to treat major depressive disorder and seasonal affective disorder.
"Failed Dissolution Specification: During analysis of the 18 month long term stability testing, it was noticed that the drug release results at the 4 hour time point are not meeting specifications," the drug regulator said in its website on the reasons for recall.
As many as 35,235 bottles (60 count) of Bupropion Hydrochloride extended-release tablets distributed by Sun Pharmaceutical Industries have been recalled.
Comments from Sun Pharma on the recall was, however, not available.
In a separate notification, FDA said Wockhardt Limited also initiated voluntary recall of 1,704 and 3,378 bottles of its Lisinopril Tablets USP, 5 mg and 20 mg respectively (both 1000-count ) bottles from the USA market.
The US drug regulator said the recall under class-II classification was initiated last month and the drugs were manufactured in India.
"CGMP Deviations: An FDA inspection identified inadequate investigations of past market complaints," the FDA said on the reason for recalling.
Lisinopril tablets USP are indicated for the treatment of hypertension in adult patients and paediatric patients 6 years of age and older to lower blood pressure.
According to the USA health regulator, Class II recall is a situation in which use of or exposure to a violative product may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences or where the probability of serious adverse health consequences is remote. (PNA/PTI)
Published by HT Syndication with permission from Philippines News Agency. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com
 Load-Date: August 30, 2015

 

End of Document


Three companies recall antipsychotic drug quetiapine: Health Canada says; Three companies recall antipsychotic drug
Canadian Press
May 18, 2013 Saturday 10:43 PM EST

 Copyright 2013 The Canadian Press All Rights Reserved
 
Section: NATIONAL
Length: 205 words
Byline: The Canadian Press
Body




OTTAWA - Health Canada says three companies are voluntarily recalling all lots of the antipsychotic drug quetiapine.
A Health Canada news release says it's due to potential contamination with the antibiotic product clindamycin during the manufacturing process.
Health Canada says quetiapine is used in the treatment of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder in adult patients.
Health Canada says it has not received any reports of adverse reactions from the product.
The government says those at risk includes people who are susceptible or hypersensitive to the antibiotics clindamycin or lincomycin, but estimates the number of patients in question is small.
Health Canada says the possibility of contamination was spotted at the pharmaceutical factory in China that produces quetiapine for the three companies _ Cobalt Pharmaceuticals Company, Laboratoires Riva Inc. and Sanis Health Inc.
Health Canada says the products affected include all lots of 25 mg, 100 mg, 200 mg and 300 mg doses of Co Quetiapine (Cobalt Pharmaceuticals Company), Riva Quetiapine (Laboratoires Riva Inc.), and Sanis Quetiapine (Sanis Health Inc.)
Health Canada said in an email that the recall represents less than 25 per cent of the quetiapine marketed in Canada.
 Load-Date: May 21, 2013

 

End of Document


Baxter recalls blood drug
Chicago Daily Herald
November 28, 2013 Thursday

 Copyright 2013 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 1
Length: 560 words
Body




Baxter recalls blood drug
DEERFIELD — Baxter International announced a voluntary recall of one lot of Nitroglycerin in 5 percent Dextrose Injection due to particulate matter found in one vial. If used, the particulate matter could lead to potential blockage of blood vessels, the drugmaker said. The drug is used for treatment of high blood pressure before, during and after surgery and for the control of congestive heart failure. The affected product code is 1A0694, and the affected lot number is G105197 and was distributed to customers between Jan. 17 and Oct. 10. Products affected by the recall was distributed to health care centers and distributors in Colombia, Saudi Arabia and the United States. Customers are being directed not to use product from the recalled lot, and should locate and remove all affected product from their facility.
Credit union names new CEO
NAPERVILLE — DuPage Credit Union has promoted Diane M. Shelton to president and chief executive officer of the organization. Shelton has 30 years of experience at DuPage Credit Union, most recently serving as interim president/CEO since November 2012 while continuing as senior vice president of sales and service. During her tenure, she managed the credit union's consumer lending, mortgage lending, asset recovery and retail operations, as well as other strategic leadership roles. Shelton is a graduate of Northern Illinois University, where she earned her bachelor of business administration degree in marketing. She is also recognized as a certified senior executive, as awarded through the Credit Union Executive Society. "Diane has demonstrated her ability to lead DuPage Credit Union over the past year while serving as the Interim President and we believe she will carry on the Credit Union's legacy of being a trustworthy financial institution whose vision is to enhance Member value," said Larry Kammes, chairman of the board of directors.
15 become child advocates
GENEVA — Kane County Judge Linda Abrahamson recently presided over the swearing in of 15 new Court appointed Special Advocate (CASA) volunteers. The new volunteers completed a 40-hour training program in order to represent the best interests of children who have an open case in Juvenile Court due to abuse or neglect. CASA Kane County is a nonprofit, volunteer organization that advocates for the best interests of abused and neglected children within the Juvenile Court system. Last year, the program served 556 children throughout the Kane County area. For more information on being an advocate for children, call the CASA Kane County office at (630) 232-4484, or visit www.casakanecounty.org.
New Lake Co. Partners member
HIGHLAND PARK — Richard H. Korengold, managing director with Mesirow Financial's Wealth Management group, recently joined the Lake County Partners board of governors. Mesirow Financial has been a supporter of Lake County Partners and Korengold has taken on the position of growing the firm's relationship with LCP to identify ways the firm can help support local citizens, governments and businesses. "Mesirow Financial has many employees who live and work throughout Lake County," said firm chairman and chief executive officer Richard Price. "We are excited for the opportunity to work more closely with LCP and participate in programs that will help the local governments and businesses."
 Load-Date: November 29, 2013

 

End of Document


Recalled drug may treat cancer
Minnesota Daily: University of Minnesota
January 10, 2017 Tuesday

 University Wire
Copyright 2017 UWIRE via U-Wire All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 1
Length: 428 words
Body




A notorious sleep aid that caused birth defects in children in the 1950s may have new life as a cancer-fighting drug.
In clinical trials last month University of Minnesota researchers found that adding a derivative of the sedative thalidomide to chemotherapy leads to a better immune system and response to chemotherapy for ovarian cancer "Äî the fifth leading cause of cancer-related deaths among women in the United States.
University researchers Linda Carson and Levi Downs focused on a different drug used to treat various blood cancers "Äî Lenolidamide. Lenolidamide has the same function as thalidomide "Äî preventing the growth of blood vessels in tumors, but Downs said lenolidamide is 40 times more potent.
"Thalidomide used to be the standard "Äî Lenolidamide is replacing it because it"Äôs better," Downs said.
Originally, thalidomide was used as a sleep aid for pregnant women. Because of its association with birth defects, it was recalled in the early 1960s, Downs said. The drug caused these birth defects because it prevented growth of blood vessels in the arms and legs. Researchers looked at these findings to try to apply them to a useful purpose.
Downs said he predicts lenolidamide will not produce any side effects, whereas thalidomide caused constipation and fatigue.
Research on lenolidamide began last year with its phase one trial. Phase two is to open within this month, Downs said.
Phase one of the study was conducted to see if the drug was safe and tolerated by patients. Phase two of the study is to see if lenolidamide kills the cancer. The final stage of the study is to randomly assign patients to the treatment and assess results.
Lenolidamide works similarly to thalidomide in that it prevents the growth of blood vessels, but it may promote the immune system of the patient more than thalidomide, Downs said.
Carson said her current research is searching for similar compounds that produce similar effects. She hopes these compounds will have fewer side effects and will be more effective in treating ovarian cancer.
"I think that more research needs to be done with all [drugs that prevent the growth of blood vessels] and [with] combining them with this chemotherapy to try to improve survival in women with ovarian cancer," Carson said.
She said she hopes the research will help women with other cancers as well.
"It only makes sense to me, or my hypothesis," Downs said. "We"Äôll see the same thing in ovarian cancer "Äî that the great results that we got with thalidomide will hopefully be superseded with lenolidamide."
Share
Related Stories
 Load-Date: January 10, 2017

 

End of Document


India: Dr Reddy's recalls drug
Daily the Pak Banker
April 18, 2010 Sunday

 Copyright 2010 Right Vision News All Rights Reserved
Length: 272 words
Dateline: Hyderabad 
Body




Hyderabad, April 18 -- Dr Reddy's Laboratories has recalled lots of Risperidone, its generic version of the drug to treat schizophrenia, from the US market. The company has recalled about 79,000 bottles of the drug's 2 mg and 4 mg tablets in 60s count bottles.
According to our staff reporter, the voluntary recall was made due to out of specification results observed during stability tests of the drug.
This is for the second time that the lots of risperidone are being recalled by the company after it did in September last year.
However, the recall per se, though voluntary, is making the analysts worry about the near- to medium-term impact of the action. In September 2009, the company recalled four of its products from the US market as a precautionary measure after it discovered that some of the lots had over-sized tablets.
'We have already put into place a corrective action plan to address the event, which we believe is isolated to these lots,' the company said.
Risperidone is an antipsychotic medication and is used to treat schizophrenia and symptoms of bipolar disorder (manic depression). It is also used in autistic children to treat symptoms of irritability.
The company claimed that the drug represents about 0.1% of its North America generic sales.
'We believe that this event will not have a material impact on the business. As an organisation, we continue to operate and take actions in what we believe is in the best interest of patients,' it said. Published by HT Syndication with permission from Daily Pak Banker. For more information on news feed please contact Sarabjit Jagirdar at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com
For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com
 Load-Date: April 19, 2010

 

End of Document


Zydus's US arm recalls drug
Times of India (Electronic Edition)
June 14, 2013 Friday
Mumbai Edition

 Copyright 2013 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: TIMES BUSINESS
Length: 237 words
Byline: Rupali Mukherjee TNN
Body




Mumbai: Zydus Pharmaceuticals,US-based subsidiary of Zydus Cadila,has announced a recall of single lot of blood thinner medicine,warfarin 2 mg tablets,in the US.Four tablets of warfarin 2 mg have been found to be oversized in one product complaint.Ingestion of a greater than intended dose of warfarin could lead to an increased pharmacological effect of the medicine.As a result,patients would be more likely to develop bleeding as an adverse reaction and in some patients that bleeding into a critical organ (mostly the central nervous system) could be fatal,a US FDA statement said.The risk of bleeding is increased if overdosing is repeated continuously on a daily basis.The product was distributed in US to wholesalers/ distributors,retailers and mail order providers in November-December 2012.The product is used as prophylaxis and treatment of venous thrombosis and its extension,pulmonary embolism (PE),prophylaxis and treatment of thromboembolic complications associated with atrial fibrillation (AF) and/or cardiac valve replacement and reduction in the risk of death,recurrent myocardial infarction (MI),and thromboembolic events such as stroke or systemic embolization after myocardial infarction.The company said it has not received any reports of adverse events or any additional product complaint related to this lot to date,but as a precautionary measure,Zydus is recalling lot MM5767 from the distribution.
 Load-Date: June 13, 2013

 

End of Document


CONTAMINATION POTENTIAL LEADS UK TO FIFTH RECALL OF RANITIDINE DRUGS
States News Service
November 21, 2019 Thursday

 Copyright 2019 States News Service
Length: 297 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: ROCKVILLE, MD 
Body




The following information was released by the Regulatory Affairs Professionals Society:
By Michael Mezher
The UKs Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) on Thursday announced the fifth recent recall of the heartburn medicine ranitidine due to possible contamination with the carcinogen N- nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA).
The recall, which affects 13 over-the-counter (OTC) ranitidine medicines marketed by four different companies, follows four previous recalls in October and November and comes as international regulators including the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and European Medicines Agency investigate the source of the impurities.
FDA previously said the levels of the impurity in ranitidine drugs for heartburn and also in the chemically similar ulcer drug nizatidine are similar to the levels you would expect to be exposed to if you ate common foods like grilled or smoked meats.
Three of the companies affected by the recall, OTC Concepts Ltd, Relonchem Ltd and Noumed Life Sciences Ltd are recalling all unexpired batches of the drug, while the fourth company, Medreich PLC is only recalling specific batches.
As with the previous recalls, MHRA says its action is precautionary to ensure patient safety and advises patients to continue taking their medicines as advised and speak to their physician before stopping any prescribed medicine.
We have asked companies to quarantine batches of potentially affected medicines whilst we investigate and we will take action as necessary, including product recalls where appropriate, said MHRA Deputy Director of Inspections, Enforcement and Standards Andrew Gray.
Gray also said that MHRA has asked the companies to submit risk assessments containing testing of the affected batches as part of its investigation.
 Load-Date: November 22, 2019

 

End of Document


Torrent Expands and Prinston Pharmaceutical Initiates Recall of "Sartan" Drugs
Indian Pharma Industry : Policies
January 29, 2019 Tuesday

 Copyright 2019 Indian Pharma Industry All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 944 words
Dateline: New Delhi 
Body




 New Delhi, Jan. 29 -- Recalls of "sartan"-containing drugs continues with Torrent Pharmaceuticals, an Ahmedabad, India-based pharmaceutical company, expanding its voluntary recall of select lots of losartan potassium tablets, and Prinston Pharmaceutical, a Cranbury, New Jersey-based pharmaceutical company, initiating a voluntary recall of select lots of irbesartan products due to suspected impurities. Overall, the recall and investigation of drugs with "sartan" active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) began in July 2018 with valsartan and has since extended to multiple companies and other "sartan" APIs, including valsartan, losartan, irbesartan, candesartan, and olmesartan. These APIs are primarily used in anti-hypertensive and cardiovascular drugs.
 In the latest recall, Torrent Pharmaceuticals is expanding its voluntary recall from 10 lots of losartan potassium tablets USP to include six lots of losartan potassium and hydrochlorothiazide tablets, USP, to the consumer level due in the US to the detection of trace amounts of an unexpected impurity found in the API manufactured by Hetero Labs, a Hyderabad, India-headquartered API producer and part of the pharmaceutical parent company Hetero Drugs.
 The impurity detected in the API is N-nitrosodiethylamine (NDEA), which is a substance that occurs naturally in certain foods, drinking water, air pollution, and industrial processes, and has been classified as a probable human carcinogen as per the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) classification. Torrent is only recalling lots of losartan containing products that contain NDEA above the acceptable daily intake levels released by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). To date (as of January 22, 2019), the company says it has not received any reports of adverse events related to this recall.
 Losartan is used to treat hypertension, hypertensive patients with left ventricular hypertrophy and for the treatment of nephropathy in Type 2 diabetic patients.
 Separately, Prinston Pharmaceutical Inc., dba Solco Healthcare LLC., has initiated a voluntary recall of one lot of irbesartan and seven lots of irbesartan hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ) tablets to the consumer level in the US due to the detection of trace amount of an NDEA impurity found in the API manufactured by Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceuticals (ZHP), a Linhai, China-based pharmaceutical company.
 Prinston is only recalling lots of irbesartan-containing products that contain NDEA above the acceptable daily intake levels released by the FDA. To date (as of January 18, 2019), Prinston Pharmaceutical said it has not received any reports of adverse events related to this recall.
 Irbesartan and irbesartan HCTZ are used to control high blood pressure and for the treatment of heart failure. Irbesartan in combination with amlodipine plus HCTZ is used to control high blood pressure.
 This is the latest recall and investigation into products containing "sartan" APIs. Earlier this month (January 2019), Aurobindo Pharma USA, Inc., the US-based operations of Aurobindo Pharma, a Hyderabad, India-headquartered generics and API manufacturer, announced a voluntary recall of 80 lots of amlodipine valsartan tablets USP, valsartan HCTZ tablets USP, and valsartan tablets USP in the US to the consumer level due to the detection of trace amounts of NDEA.
 In December 2018, Mylan Pharmaceuticals expanded its consumer-level voluntary US recall of valsartan-containing products to include all lots of valsartan-containing products within expiry. The company had earlier issued (November 2018) a voluntary recall to the consumer level of select lots of valsartan-containing products due to detected trace amounts of NDEA contained in valsartan. The valsartan API used in the recalled products was manufactured at one of Mylan's plants in India. Teva Pharmaceutical Industries also announced a recall in November 2018 when it detected NDEA in the valsartan supply it received from Mylan's plant in India.
 In November 2018, Sandoz, the generics arm of Novartis, voluntarily recalled in the US one lot of losartan potassium hydrochlorothiazide tablets (USP 100 mg/25 mg) due to a trace amount of NDEA found in the API. The API was manufactured by ZHP, which was issued a FDA Warning Letter on December 11, 2018 that outlined several manufacturing violations at ZHP's Chuannan, China facility, including those relating to impurity control, change control, and cross contamination from one manufacturing process line to another.
 In July 2018, the FDA and the European Medicines Agency (EMA) began their initial investigations into the "sartans" after the EMA learned that ZHP had detected N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) and NDEA, two probable human carcinogens, in several batches of its valsartan API. The FDA's investigation began when a manufacturer of valsartan products detected NDMA in its API supplied from ZHP, which followed with other companies recalling valsartan products, including Teva. The EU's detection of the two impurities led to an EU-wide review of all valsartan medicines marketed in the EU. The review was subsequently extended to other "sartan" medicines when very low levels of NDEA were found in losartan made by Hetero Labs. In October 2018, the EMA updated that it was evaluating the APIs, candesartan, irbesartan, losartan, and olmesartan, marketed in the EU in addition to its investigation into valsartan products. After low levels of NDEA were found in irbesartan, supplied to a US pharmaceutical company by Aurobindo Pharma, the FDA expanded its investigation to include both valsartan and irbesartan. An investigation of losartan followed in November.
 Load-Date: February 1, 2019

 

End of Document


Merck recalls cholesterol drug Liptruzet
Clinical Advisor
January 2014

 Copyright 2014 Haymarket Media. All Rights Reserved
 
Section: NEWS
Length: 210 words
Highlight: Company issues recall due to defects in product packaging
Body




HealthDay News -- Packaging defects have prompted a recall of the combination cholesterol drug Liptruzet (Merck) , temporarily affecting the entire U.S. stock.
Merck said the foil pouches holding the pills could allow air and moisture inside, potentially decreasing the drug's effectiveness. The recall covers all four dose strengths (10/10-mg, 10/20-mg, 10/40-mg and 10/80-mg) and every batch that's gone out since Liptruzet hit the market in May.
Liptruzet combines atorvastatin and ezetimibe (Zetia). Cardiologists expect no health problems to result from the recall, in part because both atorvastatin and ezetimibe will remain available separately.
"Patients are not going to be in any harm's way just going on atorvastatin until this packaging issue gets corrected," Kevin Marzo, MD, chief of cardiology at Winthrop-University Hospital in Mineola, N.Y., told HealthDay.
There have been no reports of adverse events or product quality complaints thus far.
Adverse reactions or quality problems experienced with the use of this product may be reported to the FDA's MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program either online , by fax (1-800-FDA-0178), or regular mail using the postage paid, preaddressed form available at: www.fda.gov/MedWatch/getforms.htm.
Full Article
 Load-Date: January 20, 2014

 

End of Document


POSSIBLE CANCER RISK - Pharma Dynamics to recall drug amid review
Business Day (South Africa)
July 25, 2018 Wednesday
Business Day Edition

 Copyright 2018 BDFM Publishers PTY Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: HEALTH
Length: 385 words
Byline: Tamar Kahn
Body




POSSIBLE CANCER RISK
Pharma Dynamics to recall drug amid review
The South African Health Products Regulatory Agency (SAHPRA) has asked local generic drug manufacturer Pharma Dynamics to urgently recall high blood pressure medicines containing valsartan supplied by Chinese firm Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceuticals, citing possible cancer risks.
Pharma Dynamics distributes the products in SA.
The affected products are only supplied to the private sector and currently reach about 12,460 patients a month.
SAHPRA has joined medicine regulators in Europe and the US in conducting a safety review of medicines containing Zhejiang Huahai's valsartan, which it said may have been contaminated with N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), which is a possible human carcinogen.
The European Medicines Agency announced an EU-wide recall of medicines containing Zhejiang Huahai's valsartan on July 5, and last week the US Food and Drug Administration asked three firms - Major Pharmaceuticals, Solco Healthcare and Teva Pharmaceuticals Industries - to recall their valsartan products.
SAHPRA said the presence of NDMA was unexpected, and possibly due to changes in the manufacture of valsartan.
The recall does not apply to all medicines containing valsartan, but only to those with active ingredients made by Zhejiang Huahai.
SAHPRA advised patients who were taking the affected medicines to consult their pharmacist or doctor, and continue taking their pills until they had a replacement.
In a statement, SAHPRA said it would & continue to investigate and assess whether the impurity may pose any risk to patients, and collect more data on the safety of valsartan-containing medicines as it becomes available. Any new information or recommendations will be communicated to the public.& SAHPRA acting CEO Portia Nkambule said Adcock Ingram had also registered medicines containing Zhejiang Huahai's valsartan, but they had not yet been launched in SA.
Pharma Dynamics said its affected products were Dynaval Co 80/12.5mg, Dynaval Co 160/12.5mg and Dynaval Co 160/25mg.
This was the first product recall to affect the 17-year-old company, said Pharma Dynamics CEO Erik Roos.
& We have been actively working with SAHPRA to ensure a swift recall of all affected products and we will issue a full refund for all returned Dynaval Co products,& he said.
 Load-Date: July 27, 2018

 

End of Document


POSSIBLE CANCER RISK - Pharma Dynamics to recall drug amid review
Business Day (South Africa)
July 25, 2018 Wednesday
Business Day Edition

 Copyright 2018 BDFM Publishers PTY Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: HEALTH
Length: 385 words
Byline: Tamar Kahn
Body




POSSIBLE CANCER RISK
Pharma Dynamics to recall drug amid review
The South African Health Products Regulatory Agency (SAHPRA) has asked local generic drug manufacturer Pharma Dynamics to urgently recall high blood pressure medicines containing valsartan supplied by Chinese firm Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceuticals, citing possible cancer risks.
Pharma Dynamics distributes the products in SA.
The affected products are only supplied to the private sector and currently reach about 12,460 patients a month.
SAHPRA has joined medicine regulators in Europe and the US in conducting a safety review of medicines containing Zhejiang Huahai's valsartan, which it said may have been contaminated with N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), which is a possible human carcinogen.
The European Medicines Agency announced an EU-wide recall of medicines containing Zhejiang Huahai's valsartan on July 5, and last week the US Food and Drug Administration asked three firms - Major Pharmaceuticals, Solco Healthcare and Teva Pharmaceuticals Industries - to recall their valsartan products.
SAHPRA said the presence of NDMA was unexpected, and possibly due to changes in the manufacture of valsartan.
The recall does not apply to all medicines containing valsartan, but only to those with active ingredients made by Zhejiang Huahai.
SAHPRA advised patients who were taking the affected medicines to consult their pharmacist or doctor, and continue taking their pills until they had a replacement.
In a statement, SAHPRA said it would & continue to investigate and assess whether the impurity may pose any risk to patients, and collect more data on the safety of valsartan-containing medicines as it becomes available. Any new information or recommendations will be communicated to the public.& SAHPRA acting CEO Portia Nkambule said Adcock Ingram had also registered medicines containing Zhejiang Huahai's valsartan, but they had not yet been launched in SA.
Pharma Dynamics said its affected products were Dynaval Co 80/12.5mg, Dynaval Co 160/12.5mg and Dynaval Co 160/25mg.
This was the first product recall to affect the 17-year-old company, said Pharma Dynamics CEO Erik Roos.
& We have been actively working with SAHPRA to ensure a swift recall of all affected products and we will issue a full refund for all returned Dynaval Co products,& he said.
 Load-Date: July 28, 2018

 

End of Document


POSSIBLE CANCER RISK - Pharma Dynamics to recall drug amid review
Business Day (South Africa)
July 25, 2018 Wednesday
Business Day Edition

 Copyright 2018 BDFM Publishers PTY Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: HEALTH
Length: 385 words
Byline: Tamar Kahn
Body




POSSIBLE CANCER RISK
Pharma Dynamics to recall drug amid review
The South African Health Products Regulatory Agency (SAHPRA) has asked local generic drug manufacturer Pharma Dynamics to urgently recall high blood pressure medicines containing valsartan supplied by Chinese firm Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceuticals, citing possible cancer risks.
Pharma Dynamics distributes the products in SA.
The affected products are only supplied to the private sector and currently reach about 12,460 patients a month.
SAHPRA has joined medicine regulators in Europe and the US in conducting a safety review of medicines containing Zhejiang Huahai's valsartan, which it said may have been contaminated with N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), which is a possible human carcinogen.
The European Medicines Agency announced an EU-wide recall of medicines containing Zhejiang Huahai's valsartan on July 5, and last week the US Food and Drug Administration asked three firms - Major Pharmaceuticals, Solco Healthcare and Teva Pharmaceuticals Industries - to recall their valsartan products.
SAHPRA said the presence of NDMA was unexpected, and possibly due to changes in the manufacture of valsartan.
The recall does not apply to all medicines containing valsartan, but only to those with active ingredients made by Zhejiang Huahai.
SAHPRA advised patients who were taking the affected medicines to consult their pharmacist or doctor, and continue taking their pills until they had a replacement.
In a statement, SAHPRA said it would & continue to investigate and assess whether the impurity may pose any risk to patients, and collect more data on the safety of valsartan-containing medicines as it becomes available. Any new information or recommendations will be communicated to the public.& SAHPRA acting CEO Portia Nkambule said Adcock Ingram had also registered medicines containing Zhejiang Huahai's valsartan, but they had not yet been launched in SA.
Pharma Dynamics said its affected products were Dynaval Co 80/12.5mg, Dynaval Co 160/12.5mg and Dynaval Co 160/25mg.
This was the first product recall to affect the 17-year-old company, said Pharma Dynamics CEO Erik Roos.
& We have been actively working with SAHPRA to ensure a swift recall of all affected products and we will issue a full refund for all returned Dynaval Co products,& he said.
 Load-Date: July 25, 2018

 

End of Document


POSSIBLE CANCER RISK - Pharma Dynamics to recall drug amid review
Business Day (South Africa)
July 25, 2018 Wednesday
Business Day Edition

 Copyright 2018 BDFM Publishers PTY Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: HEALTH
Length: 385 words
Byline: Tamar Kahn
Body




POSSIBLE CANCER RISK
Pharma Dynamics to recall drug amid review
The South African Health Products Regulatory Agency (SAHPRA) has asked local generic drug manufacturer Pharma Dynamics to urgently recall high blood pressure medicines containing valsartan supplied by Chinese firm Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceuticals, citing possible cancer risks.
Pharma Dynamics distributes the products in SA.
The affected products are only supplied to the private sector and currently reach about 12,460 patients a month.
SAHPRA has joined medicine regulators in Europe and the US in conducting a safety review of medicines containing Zhejiang Huahai's valsartan, which it said may have been contaminated with N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), which is a possible human carcinogen.
The European Medicines Agency announced an EU-wide recall of medicines containing Zhejiang Huahai's valsartan on July 5, and last week the US Food and Drug Administration asked three firms - Major Pharmaceuticals, Solco Healthcare and Teva Pharmaceuticals Industries - to recall their valsartan products.
SAHPRA said the presence of NDMA was unexpected, and possibly due to changes in the manufacture of valsartan.
The recall does not apply to all medicines containing valsartan, but only to those with active ingredients made by Zhejiang Huahai.
SAHPRA advised patients who were taking the affected medicines to consult their pharmacist or doctor, and continue taking their pills until they had a replacement.
In a statement, SAHPRA said it would & continue to investigate and assess whether the impurity may pose any risk to patients, and collect more data on the safety of valsartan-containing medicines as it becomes available. Any new information or recommendations will be communicated to the public.& SAHPRA acting CEO Portia Nkambule said Adcock Ingram had also registered medicines containing Zhejiang Huahai's valsartan, but they had not yet been launched in SA.
Pharma Dynamics said its affected products were Dynaval Co 80/12.5mg, Dynaval Co 160/12.5mg and Dynaval Co 160/25mg.
This was the first product recall to affect the 17-year-old company, said Pharma Dynamics CEO Erik Roos.
& We have been actively working with SAHPRA to ensure a swift recall of all affected products and we will issue a full refund for all returned Dynaval Co products,& he said.
 Load-Date: July 26, 2018

 

End of Document


Recalling drugs a tough call
Telegraph Herald (Dubuque, IA)
July 1, 2010 Thursday

 Copyright 2010 Woodward Communications, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: C; Pg. 6
Length: 294 words
Byline: MARILYNN MARCHIONE The Associated Press
Body




The arthritis pill Vioxx was withdrawn but menopause hormones were not, even though both were tied to heart risks. A multiple sclerosis medicine was pulled and later allowed back on. So, when is a drug too risky to stay on the market?
 Drug safety questions arose again this week, as calls mount for the diabetes pill Avandia to be withdrawn. Surprisingly, the Food and Drug Administration has no firm rules for deciding such cases - just a murky guideline of "when the risks exceed the benefits." "Each drug has its own complex story," so comparisons to previous decisions can't be made, said Dr. Joshua Sharfstein, the FDA's principal deputy commissioner. The agency does need better criteria for weighing drug safety, he said. It has asked a group of outside scientists, the Institute of Medicine, to give advice. A report is expected before the July 13-14 hearing on Avandia, a controversial pill whose maker, GlaxoSmithKline PLC, insists is safe. The FDA can order a drug off the market, but that can be challenged in court. Usually, a company withdraws the medicine at the FDA's request. Many things influence whether such a request is made, said Dr. Brian Strom, a drug safety expert at the University of Pennsylvania. He is a longtime FDA drug safety adviser who has consulted for Takeda Pharmaceuticals, which makes Actos, an Avandia rival. Some factors the FDA considers: * How serious is the illness being treated? Severe side effects are accepted for cancer drugs, for example, but not for an allergy drug, such as Seldane, which on rare occasions caused sudden death and was withdrawn a decade ago, Strom said. * How big is the harm? "Causing a little nausea isn't so bad. Killing people is," Strom said. * How frequent are the risks versus the benefits?
 Load-Date: July 1, 2010

 

End of Document


FDA finds more impurity in recalled heart drug
Newstex Blogs
Western Free Press( Arizona)
September 14, 2018 Friday 5:07 PM EST

 Copyright 2018 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 735 words
Body




Sep 14, 2018( Western Free Press: http://www.westernfreepress.com/Delivered by Newstex)  The US Food and Drug Administration said it found an additional 'unexpected impurity' in three lots of Torrent Pharmaceuticals' recalled valsartan drug. Several pills that contain valsartan, a generic ingredient that helps people with high blood pressure and heart failure, have been under a voluntary recall since July. The drugs were tainted with N-nitrosodimethylamine, or NDMA, an impurity that is considered a possible carcinogen by the US Environmental Protection Agency. 
It's an organic chemical used to make liquid rocket fuel and a byproduct from manufacturing some pesticides and processing fish. NDMA can be unintentionally introduced into manufacturing through certain chemical reactions. Not all versions of the drugs have been recalled, but the FDA keeps a regularly updated list of the drugs[1] that have been impacted. On Thursday, the FDA said that three lots of the drugs made by Torrent Pharmaceuticals[2] were contaminated with a second impurity, N-Nitrosodiethylamine, or NDEA, which is also a suspected human carcinogen. The agency began testing the recalled products and the pills that have not been recalled for the substance after it learned that Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceuticals found NDEA in several batches of its valsartan active ingredient. Not all batches have been found to be contaminated. In response to the second impurity being identified, Health Canada also released guidance on what patients taking affected valsartan medications should do.[3]What to do if you take valsartanIf you are worried your drug could be on the recall list, talk with your doctor or pharmacist before changing any routine with your medicine. Because not all valsartan drugs are involved in the recall, they might be able to switch you to a version of the drug made by another company. If you know your drug is on the recall list, the FDA suggests you continue taking it until your doctor or pharmacist provides a replacement. The FDA said it will continue to test all products containing valsartan for NDEA impurities as well as the NDMA. Testing should wrap up in the next few days.[4] 'As we continue to investigate the root cause of the impurities found in products that contain valsartan, our scientists are testing these products to better understand these impurities and to ensure they're not present in other products. We're also taking steps to make sure we're providing stringent oversight of manufacturing processes to reduce the likelihood that impurities could be introduced into other products,' said FDA Commissioner Dr. Scott Gottlieb. 'As we expand our investigational efforts, we'll continue to make sure the public has the most up-to-date information. We'll also continue to work with global regulatory agencies to learn as much as we can about how these impurities came about and how they may affect patients' health around the globe.' Originally posted at https://www.abc15.com/news/national/fda-finds-another-impurity-in-recalled-valsartan-heart-drug[5]. The post FDA finds more impurity in recalled heart drug[6] appeared first on Western Free Press[7]. [ 1]:            https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm613916.htm?utm_campaign=FDA%20MedWatch%20Recall%20Notice%20-%20Valsartan-Containing%20Product%20by%3A%20Hetero%20Labsutm_medium=emailutm_source=Eloqua [ 2]:            https://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Newsroom/PressAnnouncements/ucm620499.htm?utm_campaign=09132018_PR_FDA%20update%20on%20ongoing%20valsartan%20investigation%20and%20impuritiesutm_medium=emailutm_source=EloquaelqTrackId=AFC65E191707E7C0A35119014755F97Delq=b95870fbdc1d48d99a96140f25879c9aelqaid=5073elqat=1elqCampaignId=4047 [ 3]:            https://healthycanadians.gc.ca/recall-alert-rappel-avis/hc-sc/2018/67746a-eng.php [ 4]:            https://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Newsroom/PressAnnouncements/ucm620499.htm?utm_campaign=09132018_PR_FDA%20update%20on%20ongoing%20valsartan%20investigation%20and%20impuritiesutm_medium=emailutm_source=EloquaelqTrackId=AFC65E191707E7C0A35119014755F97Delq=b95870fbdc1d48d99a96140f25879c9aelqaid=5073elqat=1elqCampaignId=4047 [ 5]:            https://www.abc15.com/news/national/fda-finds-another-impurity-in-recalled-valsartan-heart-drug [ 6]:            https://westernfreepress.com/fda-finds-more-impurity-in-recalled-heart-drug/ [ 7]:            https://westernfreepress.com 
 Load-Date: September 14, 2018

 

End of Document


European regulator launches review of recalled heart drug
Medical Xpress
August 2, 2018 Thursday 6:17 PM EST

 Copyright 2018 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 394 words
Body




Aug 02, 2018( Medical Xpress: http://medicalxpress.com Delivered by Newstex)  The European Medicines Agency (EMA) said Thursday it is conducting a review of the health effects on patients of a widely used blood pressure medication recalled around the world last month. The regulator will analyse the impact of active ingredient valsartan, produced by Chinese manufacturer Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceutical Company, after warnings of contamination by a cancer-causing impurity. 
The company, listed on the Shanghai stock exchange, launched a global recall of the drug on July 18 following warnings by US and European regulators over the presence of N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), which is believed to potentially cause cancer through long-term use. In a series of pronouncements last month, Huahai said it had moved to suspend supply and had begun the recall. Valsartan is a generic drug mainly used for treatment of high blood pressure[1] and congestive heart failure[2]. NDMA was an unexpected impurity believed to have formed as a side product after Huahai introduced changes to its manufacturing process in 2012, according to the London-based EMA. It first issued an alert over the drug on July 5, and American regulators followed up with their own warning[3] a week later. The EMA repeated Thursday that there was "no immediate risk to patients" and they "should not stop taking their medicines without consulting their doctor or pharmacist". The EMA said its review is being carried out by the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use, which is responsible for probing concerns over patient medicines. Its opinion will be forwarded to the European Commission, which will issue a final legally binding decision applicable in all countries in the EU. Huahai's stock has dropped more than 20 percent since the warnings first emerged in early July. The company could not be reached for immediate comment on Thursday. https://medicalxpress.com/news/2018-08-european-recalled-heart-drug.html# Explore further: Chinese firm recalls heart drug as US, EU raise concerns[4]  2018 AFP [ 1]:            https://medicalxpress.com/tags/blood+pressure/ [ 2]:            https://medicalxpress.com/tags/congestive+heart+failure/ [ 3]:            https://medicalxpress.com/tags/warning/ [ 4]:            https://medicalxpress.com/news/2018-07-chinese-firm-recalls-heart-drug.html 
 Load-Date: August 3, 2018

 

End of Document


Reddy's recalls drug in US on labelling errors
DNA
April 12, 2013 Friday

 Copyright 2013 Diligent Media Corporation Ltd., DNA (Daily News & Analysis), distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 310 words
Byline: K V Ramana
Body




Hyderabad: Dr Reddy's Laboratories has landed in a product recall related issue once again.
The pharma major is recalling its muscle relaxant drug tizanidine tablets in the US market owing to labelling errors.
Tizanidine is used as a muscle relaxant and to treat spasms, cramping and tightness of muscles caused by medical problems such as multiple sclerosis, spastic diplegia, back pain or certain other injuries to spine or central nervous system.
According to a US Food and Drug Administration notification, the recall was voluntarily done by the company due to illegible labelling, leading to the bottle labels not containing the strength of the product or possible errors in printing details.
DRL sells 4-mg strength tizanidine tablets in 150 count bottles and the recall would cover about 1.17 lakh bottles of the drug. However, the recall has been classified as Class III, implying that the use of or exposure to the drug is not likely to cause adverse health effects.
In fact, the recall of tizanidine tablets is the second such instance in the recent past for the company, after the withdrawal of multiple lots of citalopram tablets from the US markets on complaint of the bottles emitting strong odour.
The withdrawal, too, was classified Class III.
Though they have not been classified as being adverse to the health of the patients, the recalls by the Indian companies have been worrying analysts since they have been impacting the branding of the Indian facilities in the US market.
"The rise in recalls by Indian companies has been a concern. They too have been happening on issues that are not completely serious in nature. Interestingly, the grounds of recall have been either labelling or packing issues and we need to find out why the companies have not been taking additional measures to prevent them," a senior official of a generic drug major said.
 Load-Date: April 11, 2013

 

End of Document


FDA flagged factories before medication recalls; Carcinogens found in drugs from China, India
USA TODAY
January 15, 2019 Tuesday
FIRST EDITION

 Copyright 2019 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 3A
Length: 1032 words
Byline: Ken Alltucker, USA TODAY
Body




FDA inspections show a history of problems in factories in China and India that made carcinogen-tainted ingredients that forced dozens of recalls of blood pressure drugs in recent months.
Drug companies recalled dozens of lots of the front-line blood pressure and heart medications valsartan, losartan and irbesartan - alone or in combination with other drugs - after testing revealed the drugs had cancer-causing impurities in trace amounts.
The Food and Drug Administration is investigating the underlying causes of the impurities. The FDA hasn't completed its inquiry, but inspection reports reveal problems at Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceutical in China and Hetero Labs in India before the carcinogen-tainted drugs were discovered.
The recalled products are part of a large class of drugs called angiotensin II receptor blockers, or ARBs, which work by blocking the effects of a hormone that narrows blood vessels. Many of these commonly prescribed drugs are not part of the recall. Consumers can check the FDA's website for a full list of recalled drugs.
Drug companies generally advise affected patients to check with their doctor or pharmacist before they stop taking their medications. Discontinuing a recalled drug could cause more immediate harm than staying on the medication.
The recalls underscore the FDA's enormous challenge in overseeing a global pharmaceutical supply chain in which about 80 percent of drug ingredients and 40 percent of finished drugs sold in the USA are made or handled at more than 3,000 plants overseas.
Even when inspectors identify issues, it's not always enough to prevent tainted drugs from reaching the USA.
Analysts said the agency struggles to keep pace with a global industry.
"As we see when there are widespread recalls and widespread quality questions, there is a tremendous price from a public health standpoint," said Michael Carome, director of the health research group at Public Citizen.
FDA assigns staff overseas
Congressional investigators found in 2017 that the FDA was making strides in overseas inspections this decade, but about 1,000 plants had never been inspected as of mid-2016.
The Government Accountability Office, the nonpartisan investigative arm of Congress, reported 46 percent of the FDA's offshore inspector jobs were unfilled.
In response to the report, the FDA said it hired more inspectors, developed a workforce recruitment and retention plan, offered incentive pay to retain foreign staff and temporarily assigned domestic staff to short-term stints overseas. Only 15 percent of inspector jobs were unfilled as of July 2018.
The FDA prioritized domestic and overseas inspections based on potential risk, evaluating factors such as a factory's compliance, recall history, date of last inspection and the risk of the drug.
Stepping up inspections and producing detailed findings don't guarantee that drug companies will correct or prevent manufacturing problems that can lead to recalls.
"Really, a lot of responsibility is on the people who manufacture and offer these drugs for sale," Janet Woodcock, director of the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, told USA TODAY.
Since 2013, nearly 300 products have been recalled by 65 drug plants within one year of an FDA inspection, according to Kaiser Health News.
FDA inspectors who visited the Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceutical factory in Linhai found that workers repeatedly failed to investigate testing anomalies in drug batches. The FDA did not include the names of the drugs with anomalies in its report.
Inspectors at the factory, the source of the bulk of blood pressure drug recalls, discovered equipment had fraying gaskets, rusted screws and missing pieces.
Despite these findings, factory operations continued uninterrupted. It was not until another company tested the Zhejiang factory's drug ingredients last June and discovered unacceptable levels of the carcinogen nitrosodimethylamine, or NDMA. The FDA investigated and announced a recall in July.
Follow-up testing revealed a second carcinogen, nitrosodiethylamine, or NDEA, in batches of valsartan.
The FDA issued an import alert in September to block products made at the plant from entering the USA. The FDA issued a warning letter in November about challenges including impurity control, change control and contamination from one manufacturing process line to another.
The FDA said the  Zhejiang factory inadequately investigated the initial report of NDMA.
It's unclear how long the factory had been making the tainted pharmaceutical ingredients.
In November 2011, Zhejiang factory workers changed how they made valsartan to produce more product at lower cost. The factory failed to assess the possibility of forming toxic impurities such as NDMA, the FDA said in a warning letter.
Defects, shredded documents
The India plant also had signs of trouble.
In 2016, employees at the Hetero Labs plant in Jadcherla were found shredding documents before inspectors were scheduled to arrive, according to the FDA. The lab failed to keep a log of the documents that were shredded.
One customer complained that a finasteride tablet was twice as thick as others in the bottle, FDA inspectors said in a report. Hetero failed to recall the defective lot, as required, until inspectors pointed it out.
The FDA issued a warning letter to Hetero in August 2017 saying the drugmaker failed to investigate discrepancies found in drug batches and did not regularly clean, sanitize or sterilize equipment to prevent contamination. The FDA recommended the lab hire a consultant to ensure it followed good manufacturing practices.
The FDA did not issue an import alert against Hetero.
Representatives of the Zheijiang factory have issued several statements about the recall through its U.S. subsidiary, Huahai US.
The company noted that the FDA closed inspections in 2016 and 2017 without finding any impurities in valsartan batches. When the factory confirmed the impurities in June, the company said, it notified regulators and initiated a recall.
Hetero Labs representatives shared recall notices with customers and generally advised customers to check with their pharmacists. The company did not respond to USA TODAY about the FDA's inspections. 
 Load-Date: January 15, 2019

 

End of Document


New York Gov. Cuomo Signs Legislation Requiring Pharmacies to Notify Patients of Class I Drug Recalls Within Seven Days
Targeted News Service
October 19, 2019 Saturday 8:05 AM  EST

 Copyright 2019 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 447 words
Byline: Targeted News Service
Dateline: ALBANY, New York 
Body




Gov. Andrew Cuomo, D-New York, issued the following news release:
* * *
- Drugs that are issued a Class I recall have a high probability of causing serious health consequences or death
- Cuomo: "People deserve to know when a medication that's supposed to make them feel better may actually make them sicker, and it's common sense that pharmacies communicate that information to patients in real time. This measure will help ensure patients get the facts about a recalled drug quickly so they can talk to their doctor about safer alternatives."
* * *
Governor Andrew M. Cuomo today signed legislation (S.5091B/A.4781B) requiring pharmacies to inform patients of Class I drug recalls made by the FDA within seven days. Drugs that are issued a Class I recall have a high probability of causing serious adverse health consequences or death. The severity of health risks associated with the use of these recalled drugs is particularly high for elderly patients and those taking long-term medications. Currently there is no requirement for pharmacies to communicate this information to patients who have received the recalled drugs.
"People deserve to know when a medication that's supposed to make them feel better may actually make them sicker, and it's common sense that pharmacies communicate that information to patients in real time," Governor Cuomo said. "This measure will help ensure patients get the facts about a recalled drug quickly so they can talk to their doctor about safer alternatives."
This law takes effect immediately. The law requires pharmacies to contact patients by phone or mail.
Senator Leroy Comrie said, "Every year, the FDA recalls thousands of potentially harmful prescription and over the counter drugs, though countless consumers are never made aware that their medication may be putting their health in danger. This new consumer protection law will put the onus of responsibility for monitoring and informing patients of significant prescription drug recalls on the pharmacies distributing them, so timely and effective patient notification and consultation occurs at the neighborhood level. I thank Governor Cuomo and Assemblymember Daniel Rosenthal for recognizing the need for such accountability in the pharmaceutical industry."
Assembly Member Daniel Rosenthal said, "Pharmacies are often the last point of contact between a patient and their prescription. By enacting this legislation we reduce the likelihood of any New Yorker being exposed to harmful medication. I thank Senator Comrie and Governor Cuomo for their partnership in improving healthcare safety measures for countless patients and seniors."
Copyright Targeted News Services
MSTRUCK-6897464 MSTRUCK
 Load-Date: October 19, 2019

 

End of Document


DRL recalls hypertension drug from US market
Times of India (Electronic Edition)
September 5, 2015 Saturday
hyderabad Edition

 Copyright 2015 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: TIMES BUSINESS
Length: 315 words
Body




City-headquartered pharma giant Dr Reddy's Laboratories Ltd's (DRL) US arm, Dr Reddy's Laboratories Inc, has recalled over 55,000 bottles of Amlodipine Besylate and Atorvastatin Calcium tablets, that are used in the treatment of high blood pressure and cholesterol related diseases from the US market. The recall was initiated by the company on August 13 and is still ongoing.
The US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA), on its website, informed that DRL is recalling the drug, manufactured at its Bachupally facility, for being "sub-potent".
The company has recalled eight lots of the combination drug in various strengths (2.5mg/10mg to 10mg/80mg) in bottles of 30 and 90 count. The recall of the drug has been initiated under Class-III, which means that it is a situation in which use of or exposure to a violative product is not likely to cause adverse health consequences. The company was not able to offer any comments.
The latest drug recall comes even as late last month DRL voluntarily recalled 2,952 bottles containing 60 tablets each of Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules (USP 1.5 mg) from the US market following failed dissolution specifications test. According to USFDA, the voluntary recall of Rivastigmine Tartrate Capsules was under 'Class II', which means use of, or exposure to the violative product may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences or where the probability of serious adverse health consequences is remote. The drug is used to treat dementia related to Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease and this lot recalled too was manufactured at DRL's Bachupally unit.
Meanwhile, Dr Reddy's Laboratories (DRL) on Friday announced its entry into the hair serum market with the launch of MINTOP PROTM Procapil Hair therapy. MINTOP PROTM will be available in a 75 ml pack at an MRP of Rs 995 at all leading pharmacy stores across India, the company said.
 Load-Date: September 5, 2015

 

End of Document


India: In the US, Ranbaxy recalls drug
Daily the Pak Banker
April 19, 2010 Monday

 Copyright 2010 Right Vision News All Rights Reserved
Length: 254 words
Dateline: New Delhi 
Body




New Delhi, April 19 -- Ranbaxy Laboratories today said its US subsidiary is voluntarily recalling two lots of an antibiotic drug from the American market after receiving certain complaints about them.
According to our staff reporter, The recall is being carried out at the retail level and is being conducted with the full knowledge of the US health regulator Food and Drug Administration (FDA), it said. The company, however, declined to comment on the affect of the recall on its earnings, but according to industry experts, "it will be negligible."
The company's US arm, Ranbaxy Pharmaceuticals Inc is conducting the recall after receiving a limited number of complaints about the drug, which is in powdered form, changing colours when mixed with water to make formulations.
"Ranbaxy Pharmaceuticals Inc, Jacksonville, Florida is conducting a voluntary recall of Amoxicillin and Clavulanate Potassium for Oral Suspension, which is limited to Lot No 1910779 and 1910782 with expiry of May 2010 that is currently available in the US market," Ranbaxy Laboratories said in a statement.
Based on a limited number of complaints from the US market that describe a change in colour of the product on reconstitution, the company has decided to recall all the lots in question as a matter of caution, given its commitment to the health and safety of patients, it added. Published by HT Syndication with permission from Daily Pak Banker. For more information on news feed please contact Sarabjit Jagirdar at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com
For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com
 Load-Date: April 20, 2010

 

End of Document


Takeda Issues US Recall of Thyroid Drug Natpara Due to Particulates from Cartridge
Indian Pharma Industry : Policies
October 17, 2019 Thursday

 Copyright 2019 Indian Pharma Industry All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 225 words
Dateline: New Delhi, 2019-10-17 17:38:09 
Body




 October 17 -- Takeda Pharmaceutical has issued a US recall for all doses of Natpara (parathyroid hormone), a thyroid treatment, for injection (25 mcg, 50, mcg, 75 mcg, and 100 mcg) after discussions with the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). This recall is effective immediately due to a potential issue related to rubber particulates originating from the rubber septum of the Natpara cartridge.
Takeda noted that during the 14-day Natpara treatment period, the septum is punctured by a needle each day to obtain the daily dosage of Natpara solution. When the septum is repeatedly punctured, it is possible that small rubber fragments may detach into the cartridge.
Natpara is a parathyroid hormone indicated as an adjunct to calcium and vitamin D to control hypocalcemia in patients with hypoparathyroidism.
"Takeda is committed to supply integrity, and we are working closely with the FDA to resolve the issue and resume supply as soon as possible," said the company in a September 5, 2019 statement. "The financial impact of the recall is currently being assessed in conjunction with the remediation plan. Takeda will share the financial impact once determined."
Takeda says it is also working closely with regulatory agencies in relevant markets outside of the US where Natpara is available. The product continues to be available in these markets.
 Load-Date: October 17, 2019

 

End of Document


Tylenol makers recall Fiji drug
The Sunday Times (Australia)
January 17, 2010 Sunday
1 Edition

 Copyright 2010 Nationwide News Pty Limited All Rights Reserved
Section: LOCAL; Pg. 3
Length: 351 words
Byline: Elenoa Baselala
Body




THE makers of Tylenol, Johnson & Johnson, have recalled the drug sold specifically in Fiji, the US and the United Arab Emirates.
The recall is due to the side effects of thr drug which include vomiting.
Yesterday, Johnson & Johnson Fiji rep Savendra Dayal was busy informing pharmacists of the recall.
Mr Dayal said a lot of work had to be done in identifying which of the products were in the country. So far he has managed to identify three.
"My priority right now is to inform the pharmacists," he said.
Earlier in the day, the president of the Fiji Pharmaceutical Society, Ajay Raniga, said they were unaware of the recall and had not been contacted.
He said he would contact Johnson & Johnson to verify the information.
The drug manufacturer, McNeil Consumer Healthcare Products of Johnson & Johnson recalled Tylenol Extra Strength caplets, geltabs, arthritis treatments, rapid release, and extended relief Tylenol.
Also recalled were Motrin IB, regular and extra strength Rolaids antacids, Benadryl allergy tablets, St Joseph aspirin, and Simply Sleep caplets.
Mr Dayal said only some of these over-the-counter drugs were in Fiji.
McNeil Healthcare said the company, in consultation with the US Food and Drug Administration, was initiating the recall following an investigation of consumer reports of an unusual moldy, musty or mildew-like odor that, in a small number of cases, was associated with temporary and non-serious gastrointestinal events.
These included nausea, stomach pain, vomiting, or diarrhea.
"This precautionary action is voluntary and has been taken in consultation with the FDA," McNeil said.
"Based on this investigation, McNeil Consumer Healthcare has determined that the reported uncharacteristic smell is caused by the presence of trace amounts of a chemical called 2,4,6-tribromoanisole.
"This can result from the breakdown of a chemical that is sometimes applied to wood that is used to build wood pallets that transport and store product packaging materials. The health effects of this chemical have not been well studied but no serious events have been documented in the medical literature."
 Load-Date: February 4, 2010

 

End of Document


Sun Pharma, Wockhardt recall drugs from US market
Express Pharma
August 31, 2015

 Copyright 2015 Express Pharma, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 398 words
Byline: EP News Bureau-Mumbai
Body




Sun Pharma's recall was initiated last month under Class-III classification while Wockhardt's recall was under class-II classification
Sun Pharma and Wockhardt have separately initiated voluntary recall of a number of drugs from the US market due to different reasons, as reported in PTI.
Sun Pharma initiated voluntary recall of multiple lots of Bupropion Hydrochloride Extended-release tablets USP (SR), 200 mg, 60-count bottle, from the US market for 'failed dissolution specification,' while Wockhardt started recalling its Lisinopril tablets USP, 5 mg and 20 mg from the same market for 'CGMP violations.'
According to a notification issued by the US Food and Drug Administration, Sun Pharma's recall was initiated last month under Class-III classification which was as 'a situation in which use of or exposure to a violative product is not likely to cause adverse health consequences'
Bupropion is an antidepressant used to treat major depressive disorder and seasonal affective disorder.
"Failed Dissolution Specification: During analysis of the 18 month long term stability testing, it was noticed that the drug release results at the 4 hour time point are not meeting specifications," the drug regulator said in its website on the reasons for recall.
As many as 35,235 bottles (60 count) of Bupropion Hydrochloride extended-release tablets distributed by Sun Pharmaceutical Industries have been recalled.
Comments from Sun Pharma on the recall was, however, not available.
In a separate notification, FDA said Wockhardt also initiated voluntary recall of 1,704 and 3,378 bottles of its Lisinopril tablets USP, 5 mg and 20 mg respectively (both 1000-count ) bottles from the US market.
The US drug regulator said the recall under class-II classification was initiated last month and the drugs were manufactured in India.
"CGMP Deviations: An FDA inspection identified inadequate investigations of past market complaints," the FDA said on the reason for recalling.
Lisinopril tablets USP are indicated for the treatment of hypertension in adult patients and paediatric patients six years of age and older to lower blood pressure.
According to the US health regulator, Class II recall is a situation in which use of or exposure to a violative product may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences or where the probability of serious adverse health consequences is remote.
 Load-Date: August 31, 2015

 

End of Document


Blood pressure drug recall expands over third possible carcinogen
UPI
March 2, 2019 Saturday 1:57 PM EST

 Copyright 2019 U.P.I. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 306 words
Byline: SOMMER BROKAW
Dateline: March 2 
Body




Drug companies expanded a recall of Losartan lots after detecting a third potentially cancer-causing impurity in blood pressure medication.
Camber Pharmaceuticals voluntarily recalled an additional 87 lots of Losartan potassium drugs used to treat high blood pressure and congestive heart failure Thursday.
The detection of trace amounts of a new potential human carcinogen, known as N-Nitroso-N-methyl-4-aminobutyric acid or NMBA, prompted the recall.
On Friday, Torrent Pharmaceuticals voluntarily recalled 60 lots of Losartan potassium tablets and 54 lots of Losartan potassium/hydrochlorothiazide, similarly over the detection of trace amounts of NMBA.
The recalled tablets from both companies were made by Hetero Labs in India.
Each company noted it has not received any reports of adverse events related the recall.
Previous recalls of Losartan and other angiotensin II receptor blockers, ARB medicines, such as Valsartan and Irbesertan have included two other possible carcinogens, such as N-nitrosodimethylamine or NDMA, and N-nitrosodiethylamine or NDEA.
Certain lots of blood pressure and heart failure medications have been recalled from various companies worldwide since the U.S.  in July recalled valsartan medicines manufactured by the Chinese company Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceuticals after detecting NDMA.
Recent federal research has found NDMA and NDEA's "risk to individual patients is very low," a U.S. Food and Drug Administration statement said.
"We are deeply concerned about the presence of a third nitrosamine impurity in certain ARB medications, but it's important to underscore that, based on the FDA's initial evaluation, the increased risk of cancer to patients with NMBA exposure appears to be the same for NDMA exposure but less than the risk from NDEA exposure," FDA Commissioner Scott Gottlieb said in the statement.
 Load-Date: March 3, 2019

 

End of Document


UPDATED: Sun recalls drug used for treating brain bleeding
FiercePharma Manufacturing
September 6, 2012 Thursday

 Copyright 2012 Questex Media Group LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 268 words
Byline: Eric Palmer
Body




Last week, Sun Pharmaceutical Industries had the positive news that the            FDA had cleared two of its Caraco subsidiary plants to again sell products in the U.S. This week, Sun and the FDA said Sun is recalling a drug marketed by            Caraco Pharmaceutical Laboratories because of potential health dangers.
According to the FDA release, Sun is voluntarily recalling one lot of Nimodipine Capsules, 30 mg, which are used to decrease problems due to bleeding in the brain. The recall came after a customer complained that there were crystals of nimodipine in the solution.
There have been no reports of adverse events, and the FDA says the clinical health implications of the crystals is unknown. But the agency warned that the crystals might mean the product is no longer "bioequivalent and may potentially affect patients who are being treated for a medical emergency."
Last week, Sun said that two Michigan plants have been given permission to again manufacture two products, heart drug Carvedilol and antibiotic Paromomycin. Three years ago, the plants had so many manufacturing and recall problems that the FDA sent in U.S. marshals to quarantine products.
The Indian drugmaker cautioned investors last week that "Caraco is required to now work with an external auditor conducting regular inspections for an extended period," and said additional revenue from the plants would accrue slowly.
   
   - here's the recall announcement
   
   Related Articles:
              Sun says FDA clears plants where marshals seized products in 2009
              Caraco plant fixes delayed in Detroit
              FDA seizure intended to drive "major changes" at Caraco
 Load-Date: April 30, 2013

 

End of Document


Two more I.F. clinics received recalled drugs
Idaho Falls Post Register (Idaho)
October 18, 2012 Thursday
Main Edition

 Copyright 2012 The Post Register All Rights Reserved
Section: A SECTION; Pg. A1
Length: 346 words
Byline: By Alex Stuckey, 
Body




Patients of two Idaho Falls health facilities could be at risk for infection.
The Idaho Department of Health and Welfare announced Wednesday that Idaho Eye Care Center and Walker Spine & Sports Specialists are among nine Idaho facilities to receive recalled drugs from a Massachusetts pharmacy.
Pain Specialists of Idaho in Idaho Falls and Walter Knox Memorial Hospital in Emmett were alerted of the recall previously.
The New England Compounding Center originally recalled epidural steroid injections distributed from its facilities after the injections were linked to a national outbreak of fungal meningitis. The recall was expanded to drugs used to treat joint pain and during eye and heart surgeries, according to a department news release.
No illnesses associated with the expanded list of drugs have been confirmed, according to the release.
About six patients received injections from Idaho Eye Care Center, said Craig Bates, the facility's administrator.
""We've contacted the patients and are monitoring them to make sure they don't have any indication of an infection,"" Bates said.
A representative of Walker Spine & Sports Specialists said the facility is in the process of informing the 80 to 100 patients who received an injection from its facility. She said no one has contacted the facility with symptoms.
Nationwide, nearly 250 people have been infected with fungal meningitis and 19 have died, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
One eastern Idaho man older than 60 was diagnosed with fungal meningitis after receiving a steroid injection from Pain Specialists of Idaho. The man is responding to treatment, according to the release.
People who received injections in their joints or eyes are not at risk for fungal meningitis, according to the CDC, but could get an infection.
Bates said the center discontinued use of the three drugs it had on hand from the Massachusetts facility two weeks ago.
""We don't expect any cases, but at least if there were any, an eye infection is treatable,"" Bates said. ""It's not as serious as fungal meningitis.""
 Load-Date: October 18, 2012

 

End of Document


AUSTRALIA RECALL - Aspen writes down R719m on drug recall
Business Day (South Africa)
October 30, 2019 Wednesday

 Copyright 2019 BDFM Publishers PTY Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: ECONOMY, BUSINESS & FINANCE; Pg. 10
Length: 529 words
Byline: Karl Gernetzky
Body




AUSTRALIA RECALLAspen writes down R719m on drug recall
Markets WriterAfrica's largest drug company, Aspen Pharmacare, has written down the value of a heartburn drug it sells mainly in Australia by R719m after it was recalled due to possible cancer risks.
The company's full-year results to end-June have been restated on a "worst-case basis" after Australian regulators ordered the recall of all products containing ranitidine, which contains a by-product that may pose a low carcinogenic risk from long-time exposure.
This has led to the recall of Zantac, used to treat heartburn, ulcers and stomach acid build-up, Aspen said after markets closed on Monday.
Aspen deputy CEO Gus Attridge said the company had not been directed to recall Zantac in any other countries aside from Australia. He assured consumers of the integrity of Aspen's products. "Aspen complies with global pharmaceutical regulatory manufacturing requirements and is committed to the better health and safety of our patients," he said.
Several regulatory agencies are investigating ranitidine, including the SA Health Products Regulatory Authority, the European Medicines Agency and the US Food and Drug Administration. Canada and France have removed the drugs from the shelves, and several drug manufacturers, including Sandoz and Dr Reddy's, have voluntarily withdrawn their ranitidine products from the US market.
The R719m impairment was made assuming the brand will not recover from the recall, though the company is working to relaunch it with a different formula. The cost related to the recall and return of stock from the market is not material and has not been accrued as a liability in the statement of financial position, the company said.
The total revenue for Zantac in Australasia for the financial year to end-June 2019 was R119m, 0.3% of total group revenue, and the effect of the loss of Zantac on future earnings is not considered material.
The "highly cautious" accounting treatment by the management of Zantac was probably prudent, given the concerns various market participants have raised regarding Aspen's "indefinite life intangible assets", said Sasfin Wealth senior equity analyst Alec Abraham.
An indefinite useful life intangible asset is an asset for which there is no foreseeable limit to the period over which it is expected to generate inflows.
Jean Pierre Verster, founder and CEO of Protea Capital Management in Johannesburg, said "in terms of their total intangible assets, the writedown is not material but it is not good sentiment and highlights the risks that some of its products are exposed to".
Aspen's share price declined 0.63% to close at R105.99 on Tuesday, bringing its year-to-date loss to 21.38%.
The company's share price has been battered by debt concerns, though it has gained 23.6% since reporting its results to end-June in September, when it said net debt had fallen a quarter to R40bn over six months. This compares unfavourably with its market capitalisation of about R48.3bn.
In June, it finalised the sale of its nutritionals business to French company Lactalis, resulting in a net cash inflow of €635m (R10.6bn). With Tamar Khan
gernetzkyk@businesslive.co.za
 Load-Date: October 30, 2019

 

End of Document


United States : Governor Cuomo Signs Legislation Requiring Pharmacies to Notify Patients of Class I Drug Recalls Within Seven Days
TendersInfo
October 19, 2019 Saturday

 Copyright 2019 TendersInfo - Euclid Infotech Pvt. Ltd. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 346 words
Body




Governor Andrew M. Cuomo signed legislation (S.5091B/A.4781B) requiring pharmacies to inform patients of Class I drug recalls made by the FDA within seven days. Drugs that are issued a Class I recall have a high probability of causing serious adverse health consequences or death. The severity of health risks associated with the use of these recalled drugs is particularly high for elderly patients and those taking long-term medications. Currently there is no requirement for pharmacies to communicate this information to patients who have received the recalled drugs.
"People deserve to know when a medication that's supposed to make them feel better may actually make them sicker, and it's common sense that pharmacies communicate that information to patients in real time," Governor Cuomo said. "This measure will help ensure patients get the facts about a recalled drug quickly so they can talk to their doctor about safer alternatives."
This law takes effect immediately. The law requires pharmacies to contact patients by phone or mail.
Senator Leroy Comrie said, "Every year, the FDA recalls thousands of potentially harmful prescription and over the counter drugs, though countless consumers are never made aware that their medication may be putting their health in danger. This new consumer protection law will put the onus of responsibility for monitoring and informing patients of significant prescription drug recalls on the pharmacies distributing them, so timely and effective patient notification and consultation occurs at the neighborhood level. I thank Governor Cuomo and Assemblymember Daniel Rosenthal for recognizing the need for such accountability in the pharmaceutical industry."
Assembly Member Daniel Rosenthal said, "Pharmacies are often the last point of contact between a patient and their prescription. By enacting this legislation we reduce the likelihood of any New Yorker being exposed to harmful medication. I thank Senator Comrie and Governor Cuomo for their partnership in improving healthcare safety measures for countless patients and seniors."
 Load-Date: October 19, 2019

 

End of Document


Sun Pharma, Wockhardt recall drugs from US market
News Point
August 31, 2015 Monday

 Copyright 2015 NewsPoint TV All Rights Reserved
Length: 435 words
Dateline: India 
Body




India, Aug. 31 -- Sun Pharma's recall was initiated last month under Class-III classification while Wockhardt's recall was under class-II classification Sun Pharma and Wockhardt have separately initiated voluntary recall of a number of drugs from the US market due to different reasons, as reported in PTI. Sun Pharma initiated voluntary recall of multiple lots of Bupropion Hydrochloride Extended-release tablets USP (SR), 200 mg, 60-count bottle, from the US market for 'failed dissolution specification,' while Wockhardt started recalling its Lisinopril tablets USP, 5 mg and 20 mg from the same market for 'CGMP violations.' According to a notification issued by the US Food and Drug Administration, Sun Pharma's recall was initiated last month under Class-III classification which was as 'a situation in which use of or exposure to a violative product is not likely to cause adverse health consequences' Bupropion is an antidepressant used to treat major depressive disorder and seasonal affective disorder.
"Failed Dissolution Specification: During analysis of the 18 month long term stability testing, it was noticed that the drug release results at the 4 hour time point are not meeting specifications," the drug regulator said in its website on the reasons for recall. As many as 35,235 bottles (60 count) of Bupropion Hydrochloride extended-release tablets distributed by Sun Pharmaceutical Industries have been recalled. Comments from Sun Pharma on the recall was, however, not available.
In a separate notification, FDA said Wockhardt also initiated voluntary recall of 1,704 and 3,378 bottles of its Lisinopril tablets USP, 5 mg and 20 mg respectively (both 1000-count ) bottles from the US market. The US drug regulator said the recall under class-II classification was initiated last month and the drugs were manufactured in India.
"CGMP Deviations: An FDA inspection identified inadequate investigations of past market complaints," the FDA said on the reason for recalling. Lisinopril tablets USP are indicated for the treatment of hypertension in adult patients and paediatric patients six years of age and older to lower blood pressure. According to the US health regulator, Class II recall is a situation in which use of or exposure to a violative product may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences or where the probability of serious adverse health consequences is remote.
Published by HT Syndication with permission from News Point. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com
 Load-Date: August 31, 2015

 

End of Document


Aurobindo Pharma, Cadila recall drugs from US market
eHealth
September 22, 2016

 Copyright 2016 eHealth, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 295 words
Body




Aurobindo Pharma and Cadila Healthcare have recalled over 25,500 bottles of two different drugs in the US due to presence of foreign tablets and failed dissolution specifications.

Aurobindo Pharma USA Inc is recalling 23,016 bottles of Pantoprazole Sodium delayed-release tablets USP, 40 mg as the firm "received a market complaint stating the presence of one foreign tablet (Montelukast Sodium Chewable tab 4mg) in the product bottle of Pantoprazole," the latest enforcement report on the USFDA website said.

Pantoprazole Sodium delayed-release tablets are used for treatment of erosive inflammation of the esophagus due to acid reflux.

The product was manufactured at Aurobindo Pharma's Mahaboob Nagar plant. According to the report, this is a Class II recall by Aurobindo Pharma.

Amerisource Health Services is recalling 2,626 bottles of Bupropion Hydrochloride extended-release tablets USP (XL), 300 mg manufactured by Ahemdabad based Cadila Healthcare.
The recall is due to "failed dissolution specifications - specification result for dissolution was identified during 3 month stability testing," the enforcement report by the US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) said.

Cadila Healthcare's voluntary ongoing Class III recall is nationwide and in Puerto Rico, USFDA said. Bupropion Hydrochloride extended release tablets are used for treatment of major depressive disorder.

The Class II recall is initiated in a situation in which use of or exposure to a violative product may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences or where the probability of serious adverse health consequences is remote.

A Class III recall is initiated in a, "situation in which use of or exposure to a violative product is not likely to cause adverse health consequences."
 Load-Date: September 22, 2016

 

End of Document


Dems: FDA should be able to recall drugs
The Hill
May 28, 2010 Friday

 Copyright  2010 Capitol Hill Publishing Corp. All Rights Reserved
Section: Pg. 13
Length: 597 words
Byline: By Julian Pecquet
Body




House Democrats on Thursday repeatedly called for federal regulators to be given the authority to recall drugs. Pending legislation would grant that power to the Food and Drug Administration for food, but not for drugs. Statements from lawmakers at a panel hearing Thursday made it clear many Democrats want to go further. "I think the elephant in the room is that you don't have recall authority. 
I think that's really an issue that needs to be addressed," Rep. Jackie Speier (D-Calif.) told federal regulators testifying Thursday at a House Oversight Committee hearing on massive voluntary recall of children's medicines by Johnson and Johnson. The recall followed dozens of complaints about foreign particles in its medicines, including metal flakes in infants' Tylenol. Pending legislation imposing new rules on food safety would give regulators mandatory recall authority, easier access to company records and civil monetary penalties, but drugs wouldn't be covered under the new rules. The Food and Drug Administration currently does not have these authorities for food or drugs, although it can seek court action, which can be a lengthy process. Rep. Diane Watson (D-Calif.) suggested adding the clause "anything ingested through the mouth" to pending food safety legislation that includes recall authority, so that it would cover drugs as well. During the hearing, lawmakers repeatedly asked Joshua Sharfstein, the principal deputy commissioner for the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), what extra authority federal regulators need to do their job better. Sharfstein said additional regulatory powers could have led to a faster recall after the FDA in February put Johnson and Johnson on notice that it had "rising concerns" about the manufacturing process at one of the company's units. The firm announced its recall on April 30. "With other tools, could we have gotten their attention faster?" Sharfstein said. "I think those are fair questions to ask." A legislative liaison with the FDA told The Hill that while the food bill could create momentum for the agency to get extra drug regulation powers, simply expanding the food bill to cover drugs is probably unworkable when the bill, a priority for the White House, is just a few steps away from final passage. Rather, passing a separate drug bill with a similar expansion of regulatory powers may make more sense. Thursday's hearing was called after a Johnson and Johnson unit, McNeil Consumer Healthcare, last month recalled 136 million bottles of more than 40 variations of children's medicine, including Children's Tylenol, Children's Motrin, Children's Benadryl and Tylenol Infants' Drops. Federal regulators are still looking into whether the contaminated medicine is responsible for any infant deaths, although the panel made it clear that federal regulators to date have not found any connection. Sharfstein told the panel that the risk of children having gotten sick as a result of the production problems was "remote," but that he "cannot say ... with complete certainty" that none were harmed. The FDA also informed the panel Wednesday night that McNeil knew of a potential problem with one of its Motrin products in 2008 and sent contractors to stores to buy them back instead of issuing a recall. The panel's chairman, Rep. Edolphus Towns (D-N.Y.), said the buyback "warrants further investigation." But Colleen Goggins, worldwide chairman of the Johnson and Johnson Consumer Group, said the FDA was informed of the issue at the local level and did not object. "Clearly," Goggins said, "FDA was aware of this."
 Load-Date: July 29, 2010

 

End of Document


AUSTRALIA RECALL - Aspen writes down R719m on drug recall
Business Day (South Africa)
October 30, 2019 Wednesday

 Copyright 2019 BDFM Publishers PTY Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: ECONOMY, BUSINESS & FINANCE; Pg. 10
Length: 529 words
Byline: Karl Gernetzky
Body




AUSTRALIA RECALLAspen writes down R719m on drug recall
Markets WriterAfrica's largest drug company, Aspen Pharmacare, has written down the value of a heartburn drug it sells mainly in Australia by R719m after it was recalled due to possible cancer risks.
The company's full-year results to end-June have been restated on a "worst-case basis" after Australian regulators ordered the recall of all products containing ranitidine, which contains a by-product that may pose a low carcinogenic risk from long-time exposure.
This has led to the recall of Zantac, used to treat heartburn, ulcers and stomach acid build-up, Aspen said after markets closed on Monday.
Aspen deputy CEO Gus Attridge said the company had not been directed to recall Zantac in any other countries aside from Australia. He assured consumers of the integrity of Aspen's products. "Aspen complies with global pharmaceutical regulatory manufacturing requirements and is committed to the better health and safety of our patients," he said.
Several regulatory agencies are investigating ranitidine, including the SA Health Products Regulatory Authority, the European Medicines Agency and the US Food and Drug Administration. Canada and France have removed the drugs from the shelves, and several drug manufacturers, including Sandoz and Dr Reddy's, have voluntarily withdrawn their ranitidine products from the US market.
The R719m impairment was made assuming the brand will not recover from the recall, though the company is working to relaunch it with a different formula. The cost related to the recall and return of stock from the market is not material and has not been accrued as a liability in the statement of financial position, the company said.
The total revenue for Zantac in Australasia for the financial year to end-June 2019 was R119m, 0.3% of total group revenue, and the effect of the loss of Zantac on future earnings is not considered material.
The "highly cautious" accounting treatment by the management of Zantac was probably prudent, given the concerns various market participants have raised regarding Aspen's "indefinite life intangible assets", said Sasfin Wealth senior equity analyst Alec Abraham.
An indefinite useful life intangible asset is an asset for which there is no foreseeable limit to the period over which it is expected to generate inflows.
Jean Pierre Verster, founder and CEO of Protea Capital Management in Johannesburg, said "in terms of their total intangible assets, the writedown is not material but it is not good sentiment and highlights the risks that some of its products are exposed to".
Aspen's share price declined 0.63% to close at R105.99 on Tuesday, bringing its year-to-date loss to 21.38%.
The company's share price has been battered by debt concerns, though it has gained 23.6% since reporting its results to end-June in September, when it said net debt had fallen a quarter to R40bn over six months. This compares unfavourably with its market capitalisation of about R48.3bn.
In June, it finalised the sale of its nutritionals business to French company Lactalis, resulting in a net cash inflow of €635m (R10.6bn). With Tamar Khan
gernetzkyk@businesslive.co.za
 Load-Date: November 1, 2019

 

End of Document


Heartburn drug recalled, removed from shelves over cancer concerns
UPI
September 30, 2019 Monday 11:47 AM EST

 Copyright 2019 U.P.I. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 301 words
Byline: NICHOLAS SAKELARIS
Dateline: Sept. 30 
Body




The maker of generic versions of the anti-heartburn drug Zantac is recalling the medicine due to concerns of a possible link to cancer.
Drug maker Apotex has voluntarily recalled generic 75-milligram and 150-milligram ranitidine tablets sold at Walgreens, Walmart and Rite Aid, and CVS has pulled Zantac and its own generic version from its shelves.
The medication is used to treat heartburn, ulcers and other stomach issues.
The voluntary recall was issued after brand name and generic forms of ranitidine were found to contain low levels of N-nitrosodimethylamine, or NDMA.
"NDMA is classified as a probable human carcinogen (a substance that could cause cancer) based on results from laboratory tests," Apotex said in a statement. "NDMA is a known environmental contaminant and found in water and foods, including meats, diary products and vegetables."
Concerns were first raised earlier this month but patients were not encouraged to stop taking the drug.
David Light, CEO of online pharmacy Valisure, said the levels were high enough to warrant follow-up testing.
"All of this data put together is showing a very, very strong scientific story that the drug itself is very unstable," Light said. "This appears to be a fundamental problem with the molecule itself."
Sanofi, which manufactures Zantac, said it will continue shipping products in the United States.
"The FDA reported that the levels of N-nitrosodimethylamine in ranitidine in preliminary tests barely exceeded amounts found in common foods," Sanofi spokeswoman Ashleigh Koss said. "We are working closely with the FDA and are conducting our own robust investigation to ensure we continue to meet the highest quality safety and quality standards."
The FDA says users shouldn't panic, but suggests they switch to different heartburn drug during testing.
 Load-Date: October 1, 2019

 

End of Document


AUSTRALIA RECALL - Aspen writes down R719m on drug recall
Business Day (South Africa)
October 30, 2019 Wednesday

 Copyright 2019 BDFM Publishers PTY Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: ECONOMY, BUSINESS & FINANCE; Pg. 10
Length: 529 words
Byline: Karl Gernetzky
Body




AUSTRALIA RECALLAspen writes down R719m on drug recall
Markets WriterAfrica's largest drug company, Aspen Pharmacare, has written down the value of a heartburn drug it sells mainly in Australia by R719m after it was recalled due to possible cancer risks.
The company's full-year results to end-June have been restated on a "worst-case basis" after Australian regulators ordered the recall of all products containing ranitidine, which contains a by-product that may pose a low carcinogenic risk from long-time exposure.
This has led to the recall of Zantac, used to treat heartburn, ulcers and stomach acid build-up, Aspen said after markets closed on Monday.
Aspen deputy CEO Gus Attridge said the company had not been directed to recall Zantac in any other countries aside from Australia. He assured consumers of the integrity of Aspen's products. "Aspen complies with global pharmaceutical regulatory manufacturing requirements and is committed to the better health and safety of our patients," he said.
Several regulatory agencies are investigating ranitidine, including the SA Health Products Regulatory Authority, the European Medicines Agency and the US Food and Drug Administration. Canada and France have removed the drugs from the shelves, and several drug manufacturers, including Sandoz and Dr Reddy's, have voluntarily withdrawn their ranitidine products from the US market.
The R719m impairment was made assuming the brand will not recover from the recall, though the company is working to relaunch it with a different formula. The cost related to the recall and return of stock from the market is not material and has not been accrued as a liability in the statement of financial position, the company said.
The total revenue for Zantac in Australasia for the financial year to end-June 2019 was R119m, 0.3% of total group revenue, and the effect of the loss of Zantac on future earnings is not considered material.
The "highly cautious" accounting treatment by the management of Zantac was probably prudent, given the concerns various market participants have raised regarding Aspen's "indefinite life intangible assets", said Sasfin Wealth senior equity analyst Alec Abraham.
An indefinite useful life intangible asset is an asset for which there is no foreseeable limit to the period over which it is expected to generate inflows.
Jean Pierre Verster, founder and CEO of Protea Capital Management in Johannesburg, said "in terms of their total intangible assets, the writedown is not material but it is not good sentiment and highlights the risks that some of its products are exposed to".
Aspen's share price declined 0.63% to close at R105.99 on Tuesday, bringing its year-to-date loss to 21.38%.
The company's share price has been battered by debt concerns, though it has gained 23.6% since reporting its results to end-June in September, when it said net debt had fallen a quarter to R40bn over six months. This compares unfavourably with its market capitalisation of about R48.3bn.
In June, it finalised the sale of its nutritionals business to French company Lactalis, resulting in a net cash inflow of €635m (R10.6bn). With Tamar Khan
gernetzkyk@businesslive.co.za
 Load-Date: November 2, 2019

 

End of Document


Zydus' US arms recalls drug in US
Times of India (Electronic Edition)
June 14, 2013 Friday
Bangalore Edition

 Copyright 2013 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: TIMES BUSINESS
Length: 237 words
Byline: Rupali Mukherjee TNN
Body




Mumbai: Zydus Pharmaceuticals,US-based subsidiary of Zydus Cadila,has announced a recall of single lot of blood thinner medicine,warfarin 2 mg tablets,in the US.Four tablets of warfarin 2 mg have been found to be oversized in one product complaint.Ingestion of a greater than intended dose of warfarin could lead to an increased pharmacological effect of the medicine.As a result,patients would be more likely to develop bleeding as an adverse reaction and in some patients that bleeding into a critical organ (mostly the central nervous system) could be fatal,a US FDA statement said.The risk of bleeding is increased if overdosing is repeated continuously on a daily basis.The product was distributed in US to wholesalers/ distributors,retailers and mail order providers in November-December 2012.The product is used as prophylaxis and treatment of venous thrombosis and its extension,pulmonary embolism (PE),prophylaxis and treatment of thromboembolic complications associated with atrial fibrillation (AF) and/or cardiac valve replacement and reduction in the risk of death,recurrent myocardial infarction (MI),and thromboembolic events such as stroke or systemic embolization after myocardial infarction.The company said it has not received any reports of adverse events or any additional product complaint related to this lot to date,but as a precautionary measure,Zydus is recalling lot MM5767 from the distribution.
 Load-Date: June 13, 2013

 

End of Document


Sagent recalls drug because of leaking bags
FiercePharma Manufacturing
March 5, 2014 Wednesday

 Copyright 2014 Questex Media Group LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 381 words
Byline: Eric Palmer
Body




Sterile injectables maker Sagent Pharmaceuticals is recalling a product because of leaking bags. It is the second recall in about 9 months for the company, which relies mostly on contractors to manufacture its products.
Sagent ($SGNT) said Tuesday that it was voluntarily recalling two lots of zoledronic acid injection, a drug used to treat bone conditions like the rare Paget's disease. The company said it did an investigation after getting a complaint of four leaking bags of the product. No adverse reactions have been reported, but Sagent pointed out that when bags are compromised, there is a chance for sterility problems.
The company said it sourced the drugs from distributor DDN of Dohmen Life Science Services, which is notifying Sagent's distributors and customers about the recall. The lots were distributed between Oct. 9, 2013, and Feb. 18 of this year.
In June, Sagent recalled three lots of vecuronium bromide, a paralyzing agent used in surgery that was produced for it by Turkey-based MN Pharmaceuticals. It said that routine testing of stability samples at 18 months found an unacceptably high level of impurities. Again, no adverse reactions were reported, but the company said the impurities could lead to prolonged neuromuscular blockade for critically ill patients with renal failure.
Sagent has been one of the fastest growing generic drug companies since it was founded in 2006 to specialize on injectable drugs. Its strategy has been to work primarily with contractors for manufacturing, saying it provided flexibility. But with consolidation in the industry creating some challenges, the drug company announced last year it would spend $25 million to get full control of a new, 300,000-square-foot, FDA-approved facility in Chengdu,            China, that it initially partnered on. It is the first manufacturing facility that Sagent owns. CEO Jeffrey M. Yordon mentioned the buyout of Actavis (           $ACT) by Watson Pharmaceuticals at the time as one motivating factor to get into manufacturing. He said Sagent would be severing its relationship with Actavis by the end of this year.
- here's the announcement
Special Report: Top 11 Fastest-Growing Generics Companies
Related Articles: 
Sagent recalls paralyzing agent made by MN Pharmaceuticals
           Sagent buys full control of China plant
 Load-Date: March 14, 2014

 

End of Document


Aurobindo Pharma, Cadila recall drugs from US market
Dion Global Solutions Limited
September 21, 2016 Wednesday

 Copyright 2016 Dion Global Solutions Limited All Rights Reserved
Length: 333 words
Dateline: India 
Body




India, Sept. 21 -- Aurobindo Pharma and Cadila Healthcare have recalled over 25,500 bottles of two different drugs in the US due to presence of foreign tablets and failed dissolution specifications.
Aurobindo Pharma USA Inc is recalling 23,016 bottles of Pantoprazole Sodium delayed-release tablets USP, 40 mg as the firm "received a market complaint stating the presence of one foreign tablet (Montelukast Sodium Chewable tab 4mg) in the product bottle of Pantoprazole," the latest enforcement report on the USFDA website said.
Pantoprazole Sodium delayed-release tablets are used for treatment of erosive inflammation of the esophagus due to acid reflux.
The product was manufactured at Aurobindo Pharma's Mahaboob Nagar plant.
According to the report this is a Class II recall by Aurobindo Pharma.
Amerisource Health Services is recalling 2,626 bottles of Bupropion Hydrochloride extended-release tablets USP (XL), 300 mg manufactured by Ahemdabad based Cadila Healthcare.
The recall is due to "failed dissolution specifications - specification result for dissolution was identified during 3 month stability testing," the enforcement report by the US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) said.
Cadila Healthcare's voluntary ongoing Class III recall is nationwide and in Puerto Rico, USFDA said.
Bupropion Hydrochloride extended release tablets are used for treatment of major depressive disorder.
The Class II recall is initiated in a situation in which use of or exposure to a violative product may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences or where the probability of serious adverse health consequences is remote.
A Class III recall is initiated in a "situation in which use of or exposure to a violative product is not likely to cause adverse health consequences.
Published by HT Syndication with permission from Dion Global Solutions Limited. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com
 Load-Date: September 21, 2016

 

End of Document


LAWMAKERS SEEK CLARITY FROM FDA ON RECALL OF LIFESAVING DRUG
States News Service
October 18, 2019 Friday

 Copyright 2019 States News Service
Length: 464 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: ROCKVILLE, MD 
Body




The following information was released by the Regulatory Affairs Professionals Society:
Vermont Democrat Senators Bernie Sanders, Patrick Leahy and Rep. Peter Welch sent a letter to the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Acting Commissioner Ned Sharpless on Friday seeking more information on how long the recall might last, what short- and long-term actions are being taken and any other guidance for patients.
Patients across the country have already been hospitalized due to an inability to get Natpara, and we fear that as more patients run out of Natpara, the number of avoidable hospitalizations or worse may increase, the letter says.
A Takeda spokesperson told Focus via email that it is aware that some patients have been hospitalized after discontinuing Natpara. And while noting that the recall is specific only to the US, the spokesperson added: We are working closely with the FDA, and we have submitted short- and longer-term proposals for bringing NATPARA back to the market and we are awaiting their response.
Takeda and FDA created a special use program for Natpara in late September for those with life-threatening health complications, but the company noted, It is anticipated that an extremely small number of patients prescribed NATPARA will qualify for this very limited program.
And the senators and representative said that only about 1% of patients will be helped while more than 2,500 others may be unaffected by the program. In the fiscal year that ended 31 March, Takeda said in an SEC filing that it brought in 7.1 billion, or about $65 million in revenue from Natpara.
An FDA spokesperson told Focus: Takeda is actively working to resolve the issue and resume supply. As FDA receives updates the agency will continue to ensure our communications are updated with the latest information posted to our CDER Drug Shortage website.
On that site, the listed reason for the Natpara shortage is: Requirements related to complying with good manufacturing processes. Estimated shortage duration is listed as to be determined.
The initial recall, which was upgraded to a Class I recall earlier this month, was due to the potential for rubber particulates to detach into the Natpara cartridge.
Takeda also has warned those taking Natpara and prescribers that discontinuing the injection abruptly can cause a sharp decrease in blood calcium levels (severe hypocalcemia) which can result in serious health consequences. It is critically important that patients contact their prescribing healthcare provider to discuss their individual treatment transition plan and ensure close supervision, including frequent monitoring of blood calcium levels and close titration of active vitamin D and calcium supplements upon stopping NATPARA to avoid low blood calcium (hypocalcemia).
 Load-Date: October 19, 2019

 

End of Document


Hospira recalls drug because of storage glitch during shipping
FiercePharma Manufacturing
October 9, 2014 Thursday

 Copyright 2014 Questex Media Group LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 308 words
Byline: Eric Palmer
Body





     Hospira's Lake Forest, IL, headquarters--Staff photo
Not all drug recalls track back to quality issues during manufacturing. A glitch in the supply chain can also come into play, and that is what happened with a lot of vancomycin hydrochloride injection being recalled by Hospira ($HSP).
The product, the Lake Forest, IL-based company said, may have been exposed to temperature fluctuations during transit because of "uncontrolled storage." Hospira said that there really isn't any data on how temperature fluctuations might degrade the treatment for bacterial infections and so can't say what the potential medical effects might be. It said there have not been any reports of adverse reactions.
Hospira did not say who or how the product was shipped. It did say that once it went to the customer, it was redistributed, so any provider, either human or veterinarian, should quarantine it and contact the company.
Temperature extremes were blamed for a recall by Bausch + Lomb in July. It recalled 880,000 tubes of Muro 128 eye ointment--plus 35,000 tubes of an unbranded sodium chloride product sold by Major Pharmaceuticals--after users complained of a "gritty, sandlike feeling" in the eye. Unable to find any source of the problem in its manufacturing process, it finally decided it was probably that extreme cold over the winter caused crystals to form in the product during shipping. Muro 128 is shipped in boxes warning distributors to keep the products from freezing, but with temperatures falling below -37°F in Minnesota, the company believed some of it must have been affected.
- here's the recall notice
Related Articles: 
Another drug company blames freezing during delivery for product problems
           Bausch + Lomb blames weather for recall of 880,000 tubes of eye ointment
           Merck recalls all lots of Liptruzet shipped since its May debut
 Load-Date: October 11, 2014

 

End of Document


Drug pump recall issued
Star Tribune (Minneapolis, MN)
December 17, 2019 Tuesday
METRO EDITION

 Copyright 2019 Star Tribune All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 1D
Length: 549 words
Byline: JOE CARLSON; STAFF WRITER, STAR TRIBUNE (Mpls.-St. Paul)
Highlight: Medtronic said motors in some SynchroMed II models can seize up.
Body




Medical device maker Medtronic is advising doctors and patients to pay close attention to all malfunction alarms on implantable SynchroMed II drug pumps because of a problem that has caused a handful of newer pumps to seize up and stop delivering medication for chronic pain and spasticity.
The Food and Drug Administration said Monday that Medtronic is recalling about 11,000 SynchroMed II pumps made between May 2018 and April 2019 because of a manufacturing problem that caused certain pumps to retain a "foreign particle" that can permanently jam the device motor.
The problem is considered rare but serious, because a permanent motor stall will cause the device to stop pumping liquid medication into the intrathecal space around the spine, causing the re-onset of symptoms and potentially triggering withdrawal. For patients receiving the anti-spasticity drug baclofen, a motor stall could lead to a condition called baclofen withdrawal syndrome.
"Permanent motor stall could ... cause serious injury, such as drug withdrawal, the return of symptoms of underlying conditions, the need for surgery to replace the pump, or death," the FDA said in a
MedWatch alert that was e-mailed Monday.
Medtronic said the manufacturing issue has since been fixed. The problem was not seen in devices made before the recall dates. Medtronic's neuromodulation office on Central Avenue in Fridley is handling the voluntary recall, which was first announced by the company in October and re-emphasized on Monday.
The recall applies to devices made between May 4, 2018, and April 5, 2019, with model numbers 8637-20 or 8637-40. Not every device with those numbers made between those dates is affected; rather, customers can enter the device's serial numbers into Medtronic's online recall portal to find out if their pump is affected. The company also has provided implanting physicians with a list of their patients who may be affected.
Although Medtronic recommends doctors return unused devices to the company, it is not recommending that implanted devices affected by the recall be removed. That's because the risk of complications from replacement surgery (2.1%) far outweigh the risks of a pump motor stall from any cause (0.2%), the company said.
So far Medtronic has confirmed five cases of early permanent motor stall in affected SynchroMed II pumps because of the foreign particle, including two cases identified before implantation. The three other motor stalls happened within five months of implant. No deaths are linked to the problem.
In all cases, the pump's critical alarm functioned properly, Medtronic said. A jammed pump will trigger an audible critical alarm, which also will appear on the device a doctor uses to communicate with the pump in-office and the A820 myPTM application for patients with an at-home device programmer.
The company recommends that patients, caregivers and physicians affected by the recalled device communicate about what to look for if the motor stalls.
"Medtronic is not recommending prophylactic replacement of potentially affected SynchroMed II pumps, due to the low observed occurrence of motor stall from this issue, the presence of pump alarms, and the risks associated with replacement surgery," Medtronic's letter to customers Monday said.
Joe Carlson · 612-673-4779
 Load-Date: December 17, 2019

 

End of Document


FDA expands recall of blood pressure drugs again
Pharma & Healthcare Monitor Worldwide
September 26, 2019 Thursday

 Copyright 2019 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 288 words
Body




Torrent Pharmaceuticals Ltd. has expanded its voluntary recall of two blood pressure medications after trace amounts of a potentially cancer-causing impurity were found during testing.
The recall affects Losartan Potassium Tablets USP and Losartan Potassium/hydrochlorothiazide tablets.
Tests of some of those medications revealed amounts of N-methylnitrosobutyric acid (NMBA) that were above the US Food and Drug Administration's daily acceptable levels.
This recall is related to the valsartan recall that has been expanded multiple times since July, when separate lots of blood pressure medications from different companies began being pulled from pharmacy shelves.
The medications all contained either valsartan, losartan or irbesartan and had traces of these impurities that pose a cancer risk to users.
The FDA has begun testing all heart drugs called angiotensin II receptor blockers for these impurities. Also known as ARBs, they block a potent chemical in the blood called angiotensin that causes muscles surrounding blood vessels to contract. When the chemical binds, it narrows the vessels, and that can cause high blood pressure.
What this recall includes
This current expansion includes three additional lots of Losartan Potassium Tablets USP and two lots of Losartan Potassium/Hydrochlorothiazide Tablets, USP.
Patients currently taking the medication should continue doing so "as the risk of harm to the patient's health may be higher if the treatment is stopped immediately without any alternative treatment," the FDA said in a press release.
While it is unclear exactly what the cancer risk is of continuing to take the medication, the FDA believes that the risk was low with the recall of valsartan. 2019 Global Data Point.
 Load-Date: September 26, 2019

 

End of Document


Sun Pharma recalls antidepressant drug from US
Dion Global Solutions Limited
July 11, 2014 Friday

 Copyright 2014 Dion Global Solutions Limited All Rights Reserved
Length: 210 words
Dateline: India 
Body




India, July 11 -- Caraco Pharmaceutical Laboratories, a subsidiary of Sun Pharma, has initiated recall of some lots of Venlafaxine Hydrochloride extended-release tablets from the US market, reported PTI.
According to a notification by the FDA, the recall of 26,530 units of 30-count bottles and 14,597 units of 90-count bottles is voluntarily initiated by the company through a letter to the regulator last month under 'Class-II' classification, as per the media reports.
Venlafaxine Hydrochloride extended-release tablets are indicated for the treatment of major depressive disorder, reported media.
"Stability results found the product did not meet the drug release dissolution specifications," the regulator's website said.
Tablet dissolution is a standardised method for measuring the rate of drug release from a dosage form, as per the reports in the media.
The recalled drug bottles were distributed by Caraco Pharmaceutical Laboratories Ltd in USA, while manufactured at Halol plant in Gujarat by Sun Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd, reported media.
Published by HT Syndication with permission from Dion Global Solutions Limited. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com
 Load-Date: July 11, 2014

 

End of Document


Johnson & Johnson: Recalled drugs delayed again
CNNMoney.com
January 25, 2011 Tuesday 3:15 PM EST

 Copyright 2011 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved
 
Section: COMPANY NEWS
Length: 299 words
Byline: By Parija Kavilanz, senior writer
Body




Johnson & Johnson said Tuesday that consumers may have to wait until the end of the year before drugstore shelves start to fill up again with its recalled children's Tylenol, Motrin and Bendryl.
During a meeting with analysts and investors, company executives said J&J had shipped a small amount - about 4 million bottles of Children's Tylenol - to stores last quarter.
J&J had hoped to restock retailers with all the recalled children's medicines by the middle of 2011. However, executives said Tuesday that retailers wouldn't receive adequate supplies of those medicines until the later half of the year, "slightly later than expected."
J&J halted production at its  Ft. Washington Pa. plant in May, where its pediatric pain and cold drugs are manufactured, following a recall of millions of those medicines for quality concerns. Facing shortages, It shifted production to one of its Canadian plants hoping to normalize supplies.
Also on Tuesday, Johnson & Johnson reported fourth-quarter profits that met analysts' estimates, despite softer-than-expected sales.
The company said sales in the quarter were significantly hurt by its numerous recalls of Tylenol, Motrin and Benadryl products and the suspension of manufacturing at the the Fort Washington plant.
Those recalls, followed by an absence of those medicine in stores, significantly hurt the company's over-the-counter drugs business. Its OTC sales tumbled 53% in the fourth quarter, costing the company $300 million in lost sales in the period as $900 million in lost sales for the year.
Johnson & Johnson also issued a full-year 2011 profit outlook of between $4.80 to $4.90 a share, also weaker than analysts' estimates.
Analysts, on average, had expected the company to earn $4.97 a share on average for the year, according to Thomson Reuters.
 Load-Date: January 26, 2011

 

End of Document


FDA finds another impurity in recalled heart drug
CNN.com
September 13, 2018 Thursday 12:51 PM EST

 Copyright 2018 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved
 
Section: HEALTH
Length: 474 words
Byline: By Jen Christensen, CNN
Body




The US Food and Drug Administration said it found an additional "unexpected impurity" in three lots of Torrent Pharmaceuticals' recalled valsartan drug.
Several pills that contain valsartan, a generic ingredient that helps people with high blood pressure and heart failure, have been under a voluntary recall since July. The drugs were tainted with N-nitrosodimethylamine, or NDMA, an impurity that is considered a possible carcinogen by the US Environmental Protection Agency. It's an organic chemical used to make liquid rocket fuel and a byproduct from manufacturing some pesticides and processing fish. NDMA can be unintentionally introduced into manufacturing through certain chemical reactions.
Not all versions of the drugs have been recalled, but the FDA keeps a regularly updated list of the drugs that have been impacted.
On Thursday, the FDA said that three lots of the drugs made by Torrent Pharmaceuticals were contaminated with a second impurity, N-Nitrosodiethylamine, or NDEA, which is also a suspected human carcinogen. The agency began testing the recalled products and the pills that have not been recalled for the substance after it learned that Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceuticals found NDEA in several batches of its valsartan active ingredient. Not all batches have been found to be contaminated.
In response to the second impurity being identified, Health Canada also released guidance on what patients taking affected valsartan medications should do.
What to do if you take valsartan
If you are worried your drug could be on the recall list, talk with your doctor or pharmacist before changing any routine with your medicine. Because not all valsartan drugs are involved in the recall, they might be able to switch you to a version of the drug made by another company.
If you know your drug is on the recall list, the FDA suggests you continue taking it until your doctor or pharmacist provides a replacement.
The FDA said it will continue to test all products containing valsartan for NDEA impurities as well as the NDMA. Testing should wrap up in the next few days.
"As we continue to investigate the root cause of the impurities found in products that contain valsartan, our scientists are testing these products to better understand these impurities and to ensure they're not present in other products. We're also taking steps to make sure we're providing stringent oversight of manufacturing processes to reduce the likelihood that impurities could be introduced into other products," said FDA Commissioner Dr. Scott Gottlieb. "As we expand our investigational efforts, we'll continue to make sure the public has the most up-to-date information. We'll also continue to work with global regulatory agencies to learn as much as we can about how these impurities came about and how they may affect patients' health around the globe."
 Load-Date: September 15, 2018

 

End of Document


Sun Pharma recalls osteoporosis drugs
Bureaucracy Today
March 12, 2016 Saturday

 Copyright 2016 Bureaucracy Today. All Rights Reserved
Length: 224 words
Dateline: New Delhi 
Body




New Delhi, March 12 -- Sun Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd is recalling over 3.8 lakh cartons of Alendronate Sodium tablets manufactured in India, stated the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) in its report.
The recall of 3, 81,120 cartons are happening on account of "Observed levels of highest unknown impurity exceeding specification limit at the three-month stability time point." The recall is being done by Sun Pharma Global Fze, an arm of the Indian pharma major of Sun Pharma Global Inc, Bureaucracy Today has learnt.
Sun Pharma had said it had received a warning letter from the USFDA over violation of manufacturing norms in its facility at Halol in Gujarat and the US health regulator had withheld future product approvals from the facility in December last year.
The report said "recall falls under Class II, which is initiated in a situation in which use of, or exposure to, a violative product may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences or where the probability of serious adverse health consequences is remote".
Alendronate Sodium tablets are used for treatment of osteoporosis in postmenopausal women.
Published by HT Syndication with permission from Bureaucracy Today. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com
 Load-Date: March 12, 2016

 

End of Document


FDA recalls valsartan drug products after impurity detection
Pharma & Healthcare Monitor Worldwide
July 17, 2018 Tuesday

 Copyright 2018 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 310 words
Body




The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has announced a voluntary recall of multiple drug products containing valsartan as the active ingredient following the detection of an impurity called N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA).
NDMA, which is considered as a potential human carcinogen, is believed to have been found in the products due certain changes in manufacture of the active ingredient.
The recalled products include those produced and marketed by Major Pharmaceuticals, Solco Healthcare and Teva Pharmaceuticals Industries.
FDA Center for Drug Evaluation and Research director Janet Woodcock said: We have carefully assessed the valsartan-containing medications sold in the US and weve found that the valsartan sold by these specific companies does not meet our safety standards.
This is why weve asked these companies to take immediate action to protect patients.
The regulator noted that not all valsartan drugs in the US are being recalled and it is continuing the review and is assessing the NDMA levels in the recalled products to determine their effect on patients.
In addition, the FDA intends to establish measures to minimise or remove NDMA from future batches.
FDA commissioner Scott Gottlieb said: As we seek the removal of certain drug products today, our drug shortages team is also working hard to ensure patients therapeutic needs are met in the US with an adequate supply of unaffected medications.
Earlier this month, the regulatory authorities of Ireland and the UK announced a similar recall of valsartan containing drugs manufactured by Dexcel Pharma and Accord Healthcare.
The FDA, the UKs Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agencys (MHRA) and Irish Health Products Regulatory Authority (HPRA) have advised patients to not stop using the valsartan medication and consult their doctor for a replacement product. 2018 Global Data Point.
 Load-Date: July 17, 2018

 

End of Document


FDA Requests Recall of Sterile Compounded Drug Products Produced by AmEx Pharmacy
Targeted News Service
August 27, 2019 Tuesday 8:30 AM  EST

 Copyright 2019 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 805 words
Byline: Targeted News Service
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services' Food and Drug Administration issued the following news release:
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration is reminding patients and health care professionals not to use drug products intended to be sterile made by Pacifico National Inc., an outsourcing facility doing business as AmEx Pharmacy, in Melbourne, Florida. The drugs--which include compounded ophthalmic products among other drug products -- pose unnecessary risks due to significant quality and sterility concerns.
"When the FDA becomes aware of drugs that have the potential to cause harm to American consumers, we will alert the public, Prior to today's outreach, AmEx Pharmacy refused to recall all sterile drug products and has not adequately addressed FDA's concern that it is manufacturing drugs that are not in line with the quality standards we've set, putting patients at risk," said Acting FDA Commissioner Ned Sharpless, M.D. "We urge drug manufacturers and compounders to take appropriate action to ensure quality medicines as the agency continues our efforts to protect public health."
An FDA inspection of AmEx Pharmacy's facility found conditions that could cause the company's drugs to become contaminated or otherwise pose risks to patients. As a result, the agency recommended on June 25that AmEx Pharmacy voluntarily recall all unexpired drugs intended to be sterile and cease sterile operations until the company takes adequate corrective actions. However, AmEx Pharmacy declined to initiate a recall of all unexpired drugs intended to be sterile and has not provided adequate assurances regarding the sterility and quality of its remaining and newly manufactured products.
Because of this, the agency today issued a formal request to the outsourcing facility to recall all non-expired lots of drugs intended to be sterile. The FDA is also urging consumers to stop using these drugs and dispose of them immediately. Additionally, the agency is requesting the outsourcing facility cease production of drugs intended to be sterile until adequate remediation actions have been taken.
Administration of a non-sterile drug intended to be sterile presents the risk of infection. Intraocular medications which are not sterile can lead to intraocular infections such as endophthalmitis which, depending on the infecting microorganism, can lead to a loss of partial or total permanent visual function (i.e., no light perception). Patients who have concerns about receiving any drug produced by AmEx Pharmacy or who observe signs of an infection after using these medicines should contact their health care professional.
Health care professionals should immediately check their medical supplies, quarantine any drugs intended to be sterile and prepared by AmEx Pharmacy, and not administer or provide them to patients. The FDA urges health care professionals who obtained drugs from AmEx Pharmacy to make alternative arrangements to obtain medications from sources that adhere to proper quality standards.
"Although compounded drugs can serve an important need for some patients, they present a higher risk because they do not undergo premarket review to ensure that they are safe and effective for their intended use and to verify their manufacturing quality," said Donald D. Ashley, director of compliance for the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. "The agency's compounding program aims to protect patients from unsafe, ineffective and poor-quality compounded drugs, while preserving access to compounded drugs for patients for whom an FDA-approved drug is not medically appropriate."
The FDA has received reports of adverse events associated with the use of AmEx Pharmacy's drugs. The FDA encourages health care professionals and consumers to report adverse events to the FDA's MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program:
* Complete and submit the report online at www.fda.gov/medwatch/report.htm; or
* Download and complete the form, then submit it via fax at 1-800-FDA-0178.
AmEx Pharmacy is registered as an outsourcing facility under section 503B of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. The Drug Quality and Security Act, signed into law on Nov. 27, 2013, added a new section 503B to the FD&#38;C Act. Under section 503B, a compounder can elect to register as an outsourcing facility.
The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, and security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The agency also is responsible for the safety and security of our nation's food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation, and for regulating tobacco products.
Copyright Targeted News Services
MSTRUCK-6834622 TeamManager
 Load-Date: August 28, 2019

 

End of Document


ORPHAN DRUG RECALL LEAVES PATIENTS IN THE LURCH
States News Service
November 11, 2019 Monday

 Copyright 2019 States News Service
Length: 951 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: ROCKVILLE, MD 
Body




The following information was released by the Regulatory Affairs Professionals Society:
By Zachary Brennan
When Brenda Shelton, a hair stylist in Las Vegas, logged into a private Facebook group in September, she did not expect to find out about a recall of an injectable drug she takes to control her hypoparathyroidism, a rare disorder with potentially deadly complications.
And since Takedas Natpara (parathyroid hormone) injection is the only effective treatment for Shelton, she knew when she received an official Takeda recall letter via UPS four days later that difficulties were coming.
I took my last injection on October 29, and have since been taking Calcitriol and calcium supplements (20 per day) with no other alternative, Shelton told Focus via email. The transition has been extremely difficult. According to the Mayo Clinic, low levels of the parathyroid hormone lead to abnormally low calcium levels in the blood and bones, which can lead to impaired kidney function or heart failure.
At least 100 people with hypoparathyroidism have been hospitalized since the recall was announced, according to estimates from patients and surveys from Facebook groups. A Takeda spokesperson, who confirmed there have been hospitalizations, added: "We have no way of tracking all hospitalizations that may potentially occur as a result of hypoparathyroidism patients coming off of NATPARA treatment."
Shelton explained that at times she has problems breathing and swallowing, and the cramps in her hands and arms can force her to take leave from work, which reduces her income. She said she did not qualify for a program offered by Takeda, known as the Special Use program, which allows a limited number of patients to access Natpara while the recall is ongoing.
Its difficult on my family, as well, as they are worried about the symptoms becoming more severe. There have been a few days since discontinuing Natpara, that I shouldve gone to the hospital, but I refuse to do that because the physicians there do not understand this rare disease, Shelton said.
Heather Novak, an author in Detroit, also began relying on Natpara after a parathyroidectomy when she was 18. But Novak was one of the few lucky ones, she told Focus, because she was accepted into Takedas Special Use program.
Special Use is a lifesaver, but it comes with its own set of stress (albeit way less stress than being without Natpara). They only ship out seven vials at a time, we ship them back for inspection, and our compliance with the program is reviewed every 28 days. Late shipments, Takeda staff meetings, and pharmacy issues cause continuous problems, Novak wrote to Focus via email. Some people have missed doses because of shipping errors. Missing doses is life-threatening.
She said she thinks Takeda and FDA had no idea what they were getting into when they announced the recalls. Even with stable calcium, patients who have discontinued the medication are saying the bone and muscle pain is nearly unbearable. Maybe people are fighting to save their kidneys and are worried about having cardiac episodes due to their history, Novak added.
Since the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) announced the Natpara recall was Class I last month, due to a manufacturing issue where small rubber fragments may detach into the injection, both Shelton and Novak said they have not received any updates from Takeda or FDA on when their medications will be available again.
The fact that it's been two months and we've heard nothing is unacceptable, Novak said. Shelton also said her endocrinologist never received the initial recall letter from Takeda. Takedas handling of the recall and the Special Use program is unethical, Shelton noted.
Arthur Caplan, head of the division of medical ethics at New York Universitys School of Medicine, told Focus via email: Those making orphan drugs ethically need to create a program to allow patients time to wean off a drug. The manufacturer should try to build a reserve to permit this before telling patients to go cold turkey. Legally can they get away with abandonment? I think so. Morally not a sliver of a chance, especially when there are no other options and if they have been enjoying profits for some time due to orphan status.
Shelton and Novak are not alone as there are about 2,700 patients on Natpara in the US, according to Takeda. A Takeda spokesperson added: "We are working closely with the FDA to resume supply as quickly as possible. We are in regular discussions with the FDA, and we have submitted short- and longer-term proposals for bringing NATPARA back to the market. But, at this time, we cant predict a timeline because its unknown."
More patients have also been added to the Special Use program.
"The Special Use Program, which was originally intended to be for an extremely limited number of patients (estimated around 30), is now up over 200. This is due to the high number of complex cases and individual disease parameters that qualifies them for the program given the parameters we set with FDA," a Takeda spokesperson said.
Those outside FDA, the hypoparathyroidism community and Takeda are beginning to take note. Three Vermont lawmakers, including presidential hopeful Bernie Sanders, sent a letter to FDA last month seeking more information about the recall and whats being done.
FDA, meanwhile, referred Focus to its drug shortage page for Natpara, which was last re-verified without an update on 23 October.
And Natpara is just one example of a growing list of drugs that are in shortage because of a manufacturing problem. Less than two weeks ago, FDA released a drug shortage report revealing how 62% of drug shortages between 2013 and 2017 were due to quality issues.
 Load-Date: November 11, 2019

 

End of Document


FDA finds another impurity in recalled heart drug
CNN Wire
September 14, 2018 Friday 2:50 AM GMT

 Copyright 2018 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved
Length: 498 words
Byline: By Jen Christensen, CNN
Dateline: (CNN) 
Body




 (CNN) --  The US Food and Drug Administration said it found an additional "unexpected impurity" in three lots of Torrent Pharmaceuticals' recalled valsartan drug.
Several pills that contain valsartan, a generic ingredient that helps people with high blood pressure and heart failure, have been under a voluntary recall since July. The drugs were tainted with N-nitrosodimethylamine, or NDMA, an impurity that is considered a possible carcinogen by the US Environmental Protection Agency. It's an organic chemical used to make liquid rocket fuel and a byproduct from manufacturing some pesticides and processing fish. NDMA can be unintentionally introduced into manufacturing through certain chemical reactions. 
Not all versions of the drugs have been recalled, but the FDA keeps a regularly updated list of the drugs that have been impacted.
On Thursday, the FDA said that three lots of the drugs made by Torrent Pharmaceuticals were contaminated with a second impurity, N-Nitrosodiethylamine, or NDEA, which is also a suspected human carcinogen. The agency began testing the recalled products and the pills that have not been recalled for the substance after it learned that Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceuticals found NDEA in several batches of its valsartan active ingredient. Not all batches have been found to be contaminated.
In response to the second impurity being identified, Health Canada also released guidance on what patients taking affected valsartan medications should do.
What to do if you take valsartan
If you are worried your drug could be on the recall list, talk with your doctor or pharmacist before changing any routine with your medicine. Because not all valsartan drugs are involved in the recall, they might be able to switch you to a version of the drug made by another company.
If you know your drug is on the recall list, the FDA suggests you continue taking it until your doctor or pharmacist provides a replacement.
The FDA said it will continue to test all products containing valsartan for NDEA impurities as well as the NDMA. Testing should wrap up in the next few days.
"As we continue to investigate the root cause of the impurities found in products that contain valsartan, our scientists are testing these products to better understand these impurities and to ensure they're not present in other products. We're also taking steps to make sure we're providing stringent oversight of manufacturing processes to reduce the likelihood that impurities could be introduced into other products," said FDA Commissioner Dr. Scott Gottlieb. "As we expand our investigational efforts, we'll continue to make sure the public has the most up-to-date information. We'll also continue to work with global regulatory agencies to learn as much as we can about how these impurities came about and how they may affect patients' health around the globe."
CNN's Jacqueline Howard contributed to this report.
TM & © 2018 Cable News Network, Inc., a Time Warner Company. All rights reserved.
 Load-Date: September 14, 2018

 

End of Document


FDA again expands recall for blood pressure drug losartan
UPI
September 24, 2019 Tuesday 8:26 AM EST

 Copyright 2019 U.P.I. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 258 words
Byline: NICHOLAS SAKELARIS
Dateline: Dec. 31 
Body





The U.S. Food and Drug administration has expanded a recall for generic blood pressure medications due to possible contamination with a cancer-causing chemical, regulators said.
The expanded recall includes five new lots of the medication losartan, an angiotensin II receptor blocker used to treat hypertension.
The FDA said the added lots were developed by Torrent Pharmaceuticals Limited and include both losartan potassium and potassium/hydrochlorothiazide tablets.
The agency said the medications were found to contain traces of N-methylnitrosobutyric acid, or NMBA, which has been linked to cancer. The recall applies only to lots that contain levels of NMBA above FDA-allowable levels.
Monday was the fifth time the FDA has expanded the losartan recall, which was first announced in January. The agency, however, advised patients using losartan to continue the treatment.
"[T]he risk of harm to the patient's health may be higher if the treatment is stopped immediately without any alternative treatment," the agency said in a statement. "Patients should contact their pharmacist or physician who can advise them about an alternative treatment prior to returning their medication."
The drug is also used to treat Left Ventricular Hypertrophy and nephropathy in Type 2 diabetic patients.
The FDA warned a year ago of impurities in Torrent Pharmaceuticals' valsartan drug products, which are also used to treat high blood pressure.
A study of more than 5,000 patients taking the drugs showed they were not more likely to develop cancer in the short term.
 Load-Date: September 25, 2019

 

End of Document


Emcure injected schizophrenia drug recalled after contamination detected
Pharma & Healthcare Monitor Worldwide
May 30, 2019 Thursday

 Copyright 2019 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 319 words
Body




Two injected drugs manufactured by an Indian company with a history of sterility problems are being recalled because of microbial contamination. The drugs were both manufactured by Emcure Pharmaceuticals but are distributed in the U.S. by Heritage Pharmaceuticals.
East Brunswick, New Jersey-based Heritage Saturday issued the voluntary recall to the consumer level for sublots of infection fighter amikacin sulfate injection and schizophrenia drug prochlorperazine edisylate after microbial growth was found in unreleased supplies of the products.
The company warned that patients injected with either of the drugs could get site-specific or even systemic infections that could lead to hospitalization and death. The company said no adverse reactions have been reported so far.
Amikacin sulfate injection is for the short-term treatment of serious infections from a variety of species of gram-negative bacteria. Prochlorperazine edisylate injection is indicated to control severe nausea and vomiting and for the treatment of schizophrenia.
The recall does not say which Emcure facility manufactured the products. In 2015, the FDA banned nearly all products coming out of Emcure's sterile manufacturing plant in Hinjawadi, India, and then followed up with a warning letter for the facility. The agency whipped the drugmaker for routinely using "fraudulent" test data to move drugs through the manufacturing process.
The agency then patted the company on the back for turning to consultants to help it solve its problems and changing some procedures and retraining employees. However, the FDA pointed out the facility should have known better because it had been previously warned about practices that could lead to drug contamination.
Emcure also has operations in Canada, having acquired Ottawa-based International Pharmaceutical Generics and its marketing operation Marcan Pharmaceuticals in 2016. 2019 Global Data Point.
 Load-Date: May 30, 2019

 

End of Document


FDA recalls valsartan drug products after impurity detection
MarketLine NewsWire (Formerly Datamonitor)
July 16, 2018 Monday 12:00 AM GMT

 Copyright 2018 MarketLine All Rights Reserved
 
Section: CARDIOVASCULAR, HYPERTENSION; Pharmaceuticals
Length: 270 words
Highlight: The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has announced a voluntary recall of multiple drug products containing valsartan as the active ingredient following the detection of an impurity called N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA).
Body




NDMA, which is considered as a potential human carcinogen, is believed to have been found in the products due certain changes in manufacture of the active ingredient.The recalled products include those produced and marketed by Major Pharmaceuticals, Solco Healthcare and Teva Pharmaceuticals Industries.FDA Center for Drug Evaluation and Research director Janet Woodcock said: "We have carefully assessed the valsartan-containing medications sold in the US and we've found that the valsartan sold by these specific companies does not meet our safety standards."This is why we've asked these companies to take immediate action to protect patients."The regulator noted that not all valsartan drugs in the US are being recalled and it is continuing the review and is assessing the NDMA levels in the recalled products to determine their effect on patients.In addition, the FDA intends to establish measures to minimise or remove NDMA from future batches.FDA commissioner Scott Gottlieb said: "As we seek the removal of certain drug products today, our drug shortages team is also working hard to ensure patients' therapeutic needs are met in the US with an adequate supply of unaffected medications."Earlier this month, the regulatory authorities of Ireland and the UK announced a similar recall of valsartan containing drugs manufactured by Dexcel Pharma and Accord Healthcare.The FDA, the UK's Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency's (MHRA) and Irish Health Products Regulatory Authority (HPRA) have advised patients to not stop using the valsartan medication and consult their doctor for a replacement product.
 Load-Date: July 30, 2018

 

End of Document


Merck Recalls Cholesterol Drug Liptruzet
Thai News Service
May 20, 2014 Tuesday

 Copyright 2014 Thai News Service All Rights Reserved
Section: GENERAL NEWS
Length: 396 words
Body




TUESDAY, Jan. 14, 2014 (HealthDay News) -- Packaging defects have prompted a recall of a combination cholesterol drug called Liptruzet, produced by Merck & Co., temporarily affecting the entire U.S. stock.
Merck said the foil pouches holding Liptruzet pills could allow air and moisture inside, potentially decreasing the drug's effectiveness.
The recall covers all four dose strengths and every batch that's gone out since Liptruzet hit the market in May.
Liptruzet combines two medications that work together to reduce "bad" cholesterol levels:
Atorvastatin, the generic version of the widely used cholesterol medication Lipitor, which reduces the body's natural cholesterol production, and
Zetia (ezetimibe), a Merck-produced drug that decreases the amount of cholesterol absorbed from food.
Cardiologists expect no health problems to result from the recall, in part because both atorvastatin and Zetia will remain available separately.
"Patients are not going to be in any harm's way just going on atorvastatin until this packaging issue gets corrected," said Dr. Kevin Marzo, chief of cardiology at Winthrop-University Hospital in Mineola, N.Y.
Marzo added that since the drug has been out for just a matter of months, it's unlikely that doctors have been prescribing it widely.
If a doctor feels a patient needs the combination treatment, then the doctor can prescribe both drugs individually and the patient can take two pills, said Dr. Deepak Bhatt, executive director of Interventional Cardiovascular Programs at Brigham and Women's Hospital Heart and Vascular Center, in Boston.
Patients can continue to take any Liptruzet they already have on hand, according to Merck, and should talk with their doctor before they quit taking it.
Bhatt said the real risk of this recall is that patients will hear about it and stop taking their cholesterol medication altogether.
"It should be relatively simple and even cheaper to substitute atorvastatin," Bhatt said. "Bottom line, this is something that can be addressed in a relatively straightforward way. The key is not to say, 'Well, I don't have to take anything in its place.'"
Liptruzet and Zetia each cost more than $5.50 per pill, while atorvastatin costs about a quarter per pill.
Merck said it plans to get Liptruzet back on the market as soon as possible.
Source: Office on Human Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
 Load-Date: May 19, 2014

 

End of Document


Sanofi recalls popular heartburn drug Zantac as FDA investigates probable carcinogen
Pharma & Healthcare Monitor Worldwide
October 21, 2019 Monday

 Copyright 2019 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 356 words
Body




Sanofi said Friday it will recall the widely-used heartburn drug Zantac from stores in the United States and Canada as the drugmaker and Food and Drug Administration investigate a probable carcinogen detected in the drug.
The FDA last month said it discovered a probable carcinogen called NDMA, or nitrosodimethylamine, in the drug Zantac and its generic versions. The FDA, Canadian and European drug regulators are evaluating possible risk to millions of people who take ranitidine, the active ingredient in Zantac and its generic versions.
"Due to inconsistencies in preliminary test results of the active ingredient used in the U.S. and Canadian products, Sanofi has made the decision to conduct the voluntary recall in the U.S. and Canada as the investigation continues," the company said in a statement.
The FDA said preliminary tests detected levels of NDMA that equal or slightly exceed the amounts found in foods such as cured and grilled meats.
The FDA has not recommend people stop taking the drug. However, the agency said people who want to discontinue prescriptions should talk to their doctor or pharmacist. Consumers who buy non-prescription versions can switch to other over-the-counter drugs; there are multiple drugs available for the same or similar uses, the FDA said.
The FDA began evaluating ranitidine after New Haven, Connecticut-based Valisure, an online pharmacy, notified the agency that its testing found Zantac and generic versions contained NDMA levels significantly higher than the FDA's recommended daily limits. That prompted the FDA to conduct its own tests of the drugs. It did not find the same levels of the probable carcinogen that Valisure did, but the levels were high enough to warrant followup testing.
Since then, pharmaceutical companies have recalled generic versions of the drug sold at Walgreens, Walmart and Rite Aid over concerns the medications contain NDMA.
Drug manufacturer Apotex said it's recalling 75 mg and 150 mg ranitidine tablets sold over the counter at the three chain pharmacies because the drugs might contain low levels of the cancer-causing impurity NDMA. 2019 Global Data Point.
 Load-Date: October 21, 2019

 

End of Document


COMMON HEARTBURN DRUG RECALLED OVER CANCER LINKS
DAILY MAIL (London)
October 9, 2019 Wednesday

 Copyright 2019 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Length: 437 words
Byline: BY BEN SPENCER AND STEPHEN MATTHEWS
Body




A COMMON heartburn drug has been recalled over fears it could contain a chemical linked to cancer.
Pharmaceuticals giant GlaxoSmithKline last night announced that four types of prescription-only Zantac medication were being recalled.
However, over-the-counter Zantac products made by different companies are not affected. It is feared some pills may contain traces of NDMA (N-nitrosodimethylamine) - a chemical considered to be cancer-forming to humans.
The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), which polices the safety of drugs in the UK, issued the alert. Officials said they are still investigating the safety of other medicines containing ranitidine, which is the key ingredient in Zantac.
NHS figures show almost six million prescriptions were given out for drugs containing ranitidine in England last year.
Dr Andrew Gray, of the MHRA, said: Whilst this action is precautionary, the MHRA takes patient safety very seriously.
Patients should keep taking their current medicines but should speak to their doctor or pharmacist if they are concerned and seek their doctor's advice before stopping any prescribed medicines.
We have asked companies to quarantine batches of potentially-affected medicines whilst we investigate and we will take action as necessary. We have also requested risk assessments from the relevant companies which will include the testing of potentially affected batches.
Currently there is no evidence that medicines containing nitrosamines have caused any harm to patients, but the agency is closely monitoring the situation and working with other regulatory agencies around world.'
The alert comes after the US Food and Drug Administration discovered some batches of ranitidine pills contained trace amounts of NDMA a month ago.
Its announcement sparked an investigation into the safety of ranitidine by the European Medicines Agency. Irish health officials recalled 13 products containing ranitidine last month.
The Irish equivalent to the MHRA - the Health Products Regulatory Authority - said the fault comes from a manufacturing plant in India. US retailer CVS also pulled Zantac as well as some generic versions from its shelves after officials found some pills with traces of NDMA.
Zantac is not the first medication to be recalled in the UK over NDMA fears.
The MHRA has withdrawn a series of heart drugs in the last year after tests revealed some batches contained it or a similar chemical.
The Food and Drug Administration was the first to discover some batches of ranitidine pills with NDMA. Ireland and France have since acted by withdrawing stocks of ranitidine.
© Daily Mail
 Load-Date: October 8, 2019

 

End of Document


FDA again expands recall for blood pressure drug losartan
Pharma & Healthcare Monitor Worldwide
September 26, 2019 Thursday

 Copyright 2019 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 262 words
Body




The U.S. Food and Drug administration has expanded a recall for generic blood pressure medications due to possible contamination with a cancer-causing chemical, regulators said.
The expanded recall includes five new lots of the medication losartan, an angiotensin II receptor blocker used to treat hypertension.
The FDA said the added lots were developed by Torrent Pharmaceuticals Limited and include both losartan potassium and potassium/hydrochlorothiazide tablets.
The agency said the medications were found to contain traces of N-methylnitrosobutyric acid, or NMBA, which has been linked to cancer. The recall applies only to lots that contain levels of NMBA above FDA-allowable levels.
Monday was the fifth time the FDA has expanded the losartan recall, which was first announced in January. The agency, however, advised patients using losartan to continue the treatment.
"[T]he risk of harm to the patient's health may be higher if the treatment is stopped immediately without any alternative treatment," the agency said in a statement. "Patients should contact their pharmacist or physician who can advise them about an alternative treatment prior to returning their medication."
The drug is also used to treat Left Ventricular Hypertrophy and nephropathy in Type 2 diabetic patients.
The FDA warned a year ago of impurities in Torrent Pharmaceuticals' valsartan drug products, which are also used to treat high blood pressure.
A study of more than 5,000 patients taking the drugs showed they were not more likely to develop cancer in the short term. 2019 Global Data Point.
 Load-Date: September 26, 2019

 

End of Document


Common heartburn drug recalled over cancer links
Scottish Daily Mail
October 9, 2019 Wednesday
Edition 1, Scotland

 Copyright 2019 Associated Newpapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved
 
Section: NEWS; Pg. 17
Length: 439 words
Byline: BEN SPENCER AND STEPHEN MATTHEWS
Body




A COMMON heartburn drug has been recalled over fears it could contain a chemical linked to cancer.
Pharmaceuticals giant Glaxo-SmithKline last night announced that four types of prescription-only Zantac medication were being recalled. However, over-the-counter Zantac products made by different companies are not affected. It is feared some pills may contain traces of NDMA (N-nitrosodimethylamine) - a chemical considered to be cancer-forming to humans.
The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), which polices the safety of drugs in the UK, issued the alert. Officials said they are still investigating the safety of other medicines containing ranitidine, which is the key ingredient in Zantac.
NHS figures show almost six million prescriptions were given out for drugs containing ranitidine last year.
Dr Andrew Gray, of the MHRA, said: 'Whilst this action is precautionary, the MHRA takes patient safety very seriously.
'Patients should keep taking their current medicines but should speak to their doctor or pharmacist if they are concerned and seek their doctor's advice before stopping any prescribed medicines. 'We have asked companies to quarantine batches of potentiallyaffected medicines whilst we investigate and we will take action as necessary. We have also requested risk assessments from the relevant companies which will include the testing of potentially affected batches.
'Currently there is no evidence that medicines containing nitrosamines have caused any harm to patients, but the agency is closely monitoring the situation and working with other regulatory agencies around world.' The alert comes after the US Food and Drug Administration discovered some batches of ranitidine pills contained trace amounts of NDMA a month ago.
Its announcement sparked an investigation into the safety of ranitidine by the European Medicines Agency. Irish health officials recalled 13 products containing ranitidine last month.
The Irish equivalent to the MHRA - the Health Products Regulatory Authority - said the fault comes from a manufacturing plant in India. US retailer CVS also pulled Zantac as well as some generic versions from its shelves after officials found some pills with traces of NDMA.
Zantac is not the first medication to be recalled in the UK over NDMA fears.
The MHRA has withdrawn a series of heart drugs in the last year after tests revealed some batches contained it or a similar chemical.
The Food and Drug Administration was the first to discover some batches of ranitidine pills with NDMA. Ireland and France have since acted by withdrawing stocks of ranitidine.
'Keep taking your medicines'
 Load-Date: October 9, 2019

 

End of Document


FDA reversal: Keep taking recalled cholesterol drug
CNN.com
November 30, 2012 Friday 5:26 PM EST

 Copyright 2012 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved
 
Section: HEALTH
Length: 310 words
Byline: By Elizabeth Cohen, Senior Medical Correspondent
Body




The Food and Drug Administration advised patients Friday to keep taking a popular cholesterol drug even though it might contain specks of glass, reversing advice it gave just a day ago.
Millions of people take Ranbaxy Pharmaceutical's generic Lipitor, or atorvastatin, and many have been calling pharmacies confused about whether to take the drugs they have in their medicine cabinets.
Ranbaxy initiated a recall November 9 and told pharmacies to stop dispensing the drug, but gave no advice to consumers about what to do with what was in their medicine cabinets.
Dr. Janet Woodcock, director of the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, said the agency would review how it handles communication to the public during recalls.
"It took us some time to figure out what was going on," she said. "We need to fix our process a little bit."
FDA: Stop taking recalled cholesterol drug
Between 3 million and 4 million people take Ranbaxy's atorvastatin, according to Ross Muken, senior managing director at ISI Group. The company has more than a 40% share of the generic Lipitor market.
The FDA made no public statements on the recall until Thursday, when the agency said concerned patients should stop taking their medicine if their pharmacist confirmed it was from a recalled lot.
After a conference call Friday afternoon with pharmacies and other groups, the agency decided to change their guidance.
"Yesterday's statement was poorly phrased," Woodcock said Friday. "It made people think they should stop taking their medicine."
The glass particles are "the size of a grain of sand," she added.
The pills "aren't of the quality we would expect of a drug, but they aren't risky, either," Woodcock said.
Ranbaxy has stopped making atorvastatin while they investigate how the glass got into the drug, according to the FDA.
Recall leaves glass-specked drug in hands of patients
 Load-Date: December 1, 2012

 

End of Document


Health Canada warns of critical shortage of recalled drug
Digital Journal
June 18, 2017 Sunday 12:17 PM EST

 Copyright 2017 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 541 words
Body




Jun 18, 2017( Digital Journal: http://www.digitaljournal.com Delivered by Newstex)  A recall due to possible contamination has resulted in a severe shortage of injectable sodium bicarbonate. Less than a week's supply of the drug used to treat critically ill patients remains in Alberta and other options are being examined. Yesterday, Health Canada issued a release[1] advising of the shortage. 
The agency advised Pfizer Canada notified them of the shortage on Jun. 14. According to the drug manufacturer, two batches of injectable sodium bicarbonate were recalled due to possible contamination. Although the risk of contamination to patients is low, the withdrawal of the drug from the market exacerbated the global shortage of the drug that began last month as a result of manufacturing delays.READ ALSO: Hospitals in U.S. frantic over shortage of sodium bicarbonate[2] Injectable sodium bicarbonate is used to treat the build-up of acid in the blood in critically ill patients. It is used in open heart surgery, organ failure and in some types of chemotherapy. The drug is also used as an anecdote to some poisons. The province of Alberta has been especially hard hit. When Alberta Health Services (AHS) first learned of the shortage[3] due to manufacturing delays, the province had a six to seven week supply of the drug. After the recall, the amount of injectable sodium bicarbonate the AHS has will last less than a week. Maurice Chies, VP of clinical support services[4], said the less than a week estimate is a worst case scenario. AHS is working on other strategies including looking for other sources and finding substitute drugs. Yesterday, after Health Canada's announcement Alberta Health Services issued its own statement[5]. In the release, Dr. Francois Belanger, vice president of Quality and Chief Medical Officer, said AHS will do everything possible to minimize the effect the drug shortage has on patients and they are considering all options to ensure patients receive the best medical care possible. AHS has put the following protocols in place. Use of injectable sodium bicarbonate will only be used in the most critical cases and approval must be obtained before it can be used. All cases will be ranked according to priority and alternative treatment will be considered. AHS will also work with Health Canada to search for alternative sources where it is possible to do so. And AHS will work with doctors and clinicians, providing them with the necessary information including options for alternatives for the use of injectable sodium bicarbonate. AHS is hoping their current stock of the drug will last until at least the middle of July when it is expected more of the drug can be obtained. [ 1]: http://healthycanadians.gc.ca/recall-alert-rappel-avis/hc-sc/2017/63654a-eng.php [ 2]:            http://www.digitaljournal.com/life/health/hospitals-in-usa-frantic-over-shortage-of-sodium-bicarbonate/article/493331 [ 3]:            http://www.edmontonsun.com/2017/06/17/recall-has-alberta-potentially-down-to-one-week-supply-of-sodium-bicarbonate [ 4]:            http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/edmonton/sodium-bicarbonate-shortage-alberta-1.4165876 [ 5]:            http://www.albertahealthservices.ca/news/Page13907.aspx 
 Load-Date: June 18, 2017

 

End of Document


Sun Pharma recalls antidepressant drug from US market
Business Line
July 11, 2014 Friday

 Copyright 2014 Business Line All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 204 words
Dateline: Hyderabad 
Body




 Hyderabad, July 11 -- Caraco Pharmaceutical Laboratories, a subsidiary of Sun Pharma, has initiated recall of some lots of Venlafaxine Hydrochloride extended-release tablets from the US market.
 According to a notification by the FDA, the recall of 26,530 units of 30-count bottles and 14,597 units of 90-count bottles is voluntarily initiated by the company through a letter to the regulator last month under 'Class-II' classification.
 Venlafaxine Hydrochloride extended-release tablets are indicated for the treatment of major depressive disorder.
 "Stability results found the product did not meet the drug release dissolution specifications," the regulator's Web site said.
 Tablet dissolution is a standardised method for measuring the rate of drug release from a dosage form.
 The recalled drug bottles were distributed by Caraco Pharmaceutical Laboratories Ltd in USA, while manufactured at Halol plant in Gujarat by Sun Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd.
 According to the US health regulator, Class II recall is a situation in which the use of or exposure to a violative product may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences or where the probability of serious adverse health consequences is remote.
 Load-Date: September 22, 2015

 

End of Document


Popular heartburn drugs are being recalled over cancer worries
FOX - 2 KTVI (St. Louis)
September 27, 2019 Friday

 Copyright 2019 Local TV LLC
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 337 words
Byline: Tribune Media
Body




×
Popular heartburn drugs are being recalled over cancer worries
 Nearly two weeks after a probable carcinogen was detected at low levels in heartburn medications, the over-the-counter drugs are being recalled.
 Drug manufacturer Apotex said Thursday it's voluntarily recalling 75mg and 150mg ranitidine tablets sold at Walgreens, Walmart, and Rite Aid over the possible presence of cancer-causing impurity NDMA.
 USA Today notes the acid-reducing drugs are generic versions of Zantac. The FDA has the complete list of recalled products here. Earlier this week, Novartis-owned Sandoz recalled 30-count, 50-count and 500-count bottles of prescription ranitidine capsules, and overseas, British drugmaker GlaxoSmithKline is recalling ranitidine products in India and Hong Kong (it does not sell versions of the drug in the US). Several countries are taking steps to restrict sales of drugs containing ranitidine , ABC News reports.
 The FDA is testing Zantac and its generic versions, but has not yet asked drugmakers for a recall. And Sanofi, which produces the brand-name Zantac, is not yet making any moves.
 "The FDA reported that the levels of N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) in ranitidine in preliminary tests barely exceed amounts found in common foods," says a Sanofi spokesperson. "We are working closely with the FDA and are conducting our own robust investigations to ensure we continue to meet the highest quality safety and quality standards."
 NDMA and two other cancer-causing substances have also led to widespread recalls of blood pressure and heart medications since last year. Manufacturing flaws were blamed for that, but in this case, experts say it's likely that enzymes in a person's body react with the ranitidine molecule and actually create NDMA. See the FDA's updates here. (Read more drug recall stories.)
 More From Newser:
 *  3 Species Were Known to Go Through Menopause. Now It's 5
 *  New Python Hybrid May Spell Future Trouble in Everglades
 *  Entire Arctic Expedition Perished, but Not Because of Lead
 Load-Date: September 28, 2019

 

End of Document


FDA expands drug recall
Pharma & Healthcare Monitor Worldwide
August 27, 2018 Monday

 Copyright 2018 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 469 words
Body




The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has expanded its recall of valsartan, a medicine used to control blood pressure and help prevent heart failure, after some ingredients were found to contain an impurity.
In the latest alert, the FDA is recalling the batches of valsartan that use pharmaceutical ingredients supplied by India`s Hetero Labs Limited.
The ingredients contain high levels of N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), a substance that poses a potential cancer risk.
Surachoke Tangwiwat, the FDA deputy secretary-general, said the recall affects three pharmaceutical companies -- two of them being importers and distributors of valsartan supplied by the Indian-based manufacturer, and the other a licensed manufacturer of the drug using ingredients from the Indian firm.
Valsartan is off-patent and is used as a component in other generic medicines.
Two formulas that are being withdrawn from the shelves are DOFORGE-160 and VALSAN-160.
The importers of the drugs are also required to submit the details of the imports and the sales of valsartan with the impurity since 2015 to the FDA by Aug 31 while the local manufacturer is required to recall the drug within 15 days.
"The FDA has ordered the importers to suspend sales of valsartan that use the ingredients from Hetero Labs Limited and to submit the details of the drug imported since 2015. The licensed manufacturer has been instructed to end the production and sales," he said.
Last month the FDA recalled five formulas of valsartan that used pharmaceutical ingredients supplied by Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceuticals. The materials from the China-based manufacturer were found to contain NDMA.
The five formulas that were already withdrawn are Valatan 80, Valatan 160, Valsarin 80, Valsarin 160 and Vasarin 320.
The expanded recall is unlikely to affect patient care due to the availability of other valsartan products.
According to Dr Surachoke, following the extended recall, a total of 36 formulas of valsartan are still available for consumption. Thirty-one of them are imported and the rest are locally produced.
"The FDA will see to it the recalled medicine is properly destroyed. A rapid alert has been sent to relevant agencies nationwide," he said.
Dr Surachoke is urging users of valsartan to check their medicine and return them to hospitals or clinics that prescribed the drug if they are DOFORGE-160 or VALSAN-160 and ask their doctors for new prescriptions.
Two weeks ago, the FDA recalled serratiopeptidase after doubts over its anti-inflammatory efficacy were raised in Japan after more than 40 years on the market.
The drug, also known as serrapeptase, or Dasen in Japan, has been ordered removed from the market within 15 days and its production formula has also been withdrawn from registration in Thailand, according to the FDA. 2018 Global Data Point.
 Load-Date: August 27, 2018

 

End of Document


Hospira Recalls Cancer Drug After Finding Carboplatin Crystals
QMN Weekly Bulletin
December 21, 2012 Friday

 Copyright 2012 Washington Business Information, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: Vol. 4; No. 51
Length: 239 words
Body




Hospira is recalling three lots of carboplatin injection due to crystalized carboplatin particles observed in retain samples.
The company has initiated an investigation to determine the root cause of the problem. Hospira spokesman Dan Rosenberg declined to detail any potential findings Monday, saying only that the drugmaker is working closely with the FDA on that and other manufacturing issues.
The injectable drug giant performed the user-level recall out of precaution even though it has not received any reports of adverse events or product quality complaints associated with the lots, it said. If particulate matter is injected into a patient, there may be a potential for serious and/or life threatening patient injury due to blood vessel obstruction, the company noted.
Recently, the FDA's Office of International Programs said it is exploring a single, global drug recall system that would encompass all domestic and international drug recalls.
No one can argue that it seems the FDA appears to be taking a tough stance on recall strategy. Are you ready? Now, more than ever, you need a proactive recall strategy, one that includes the United States and every other country in which your products are sold.
With FDAnews' rebroadcast of International Drug and Device Recalls Proactive Planning for FDA, WHO, EMA and Health Canada, you can gain piece of mind that you are ready if and when a recall occurs.
Release date: Dec. 21, 2012
 Load-Date: December 24, 2012

 

End of Document


Aurobindo recalls hypertension drug in US, cites cancer risk
DNA
November 5, 2018 Monday

 Copyright 2018 Diligent Media Corporation Ltd., DNA (Daily News & Analysis), distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 227 words
Byline: DNA Money Correspondent
Body




Mumbai: Aurobindo Pharma Ltd has initiated a voluntary recall of 22 batches of  Irbesartan, used for treating blood pressure, in the United States due to the presence of an impurity that could cause cancer.

In a recent notification on its website, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) said that the recall of drug substance Irbesartan was due to the presence of an impurity, N-nitrosodiethylamine (NDEA), which is a substance that occurs naturally in certain foods, drinking water, air pollution and industrial processes. NDEA has been classified as a probable human carcinogen as per International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC).

NDEA is used in the making of liquid rocket fuel and is a byproduct of fish processing as well as manufacturing of certain pesticides.

These 22 batches of Irbesartan drug substance were supplied to ScieGen Pharmaceuticals Inc, US for the manufacturing of finished Irbesartan drug product, the notification further said.

According to the US FDA website, Aurobindo Pharma has notified ScieGen Pharmaceuticals of the recall and is arranging for the return of all available Irbesartan drug substance. The pharmaceutical company has further advised Sciegen Pharmaceuticals to contact its distributors and retailers to return Irbesartan drug product and finished Irbesartan tablets that have been identified by the drug manufacturer.
 Load-Date: November 5, 2018

 

End of Document


Emcure injected schizophrenia drug recalled after contamination detected
FiercePharma
May 28, 2019

 Copyright 2019 Questex Media Group LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: ARTICLE
Length: 326 words
Byline: Eric Palmer
Highlight: Two injected drugs manufactured by an Indian company with a history of sterility problems are being recalled because of microbial contamination. The drugs were both manufactured by Emcure Pharmaceuticals but are distributed in the U.S. by Heritage Pharmaceuticals.\r
Body




Two injected drugs manufactured by an Indian company with a history of sterility problems are being recalled because of microbial contamination. The drugs were both manufactured by Emcure Pharmaceuticals but are distributed in the U.S. by Heritage Pharmaceuticals.
East Brunswick, New Jersey-based Heritage Saturday issued the voluntary recall to the consumer level for sublots of infection fighter amikacin sulfate injection and schizophrenia drug prochlorperazine edisylate after microbial growth was found in unreleased supplies of the products.
The company warned that patients injected with either of the drugs could get site-specific or even systemic infections that could lead to hospitalization and death. The company said no adverse reactions have been reported so far.
RELATED: FDA castigates India's Emcure for routinely faking data
Amikacin sulfate injection is for the short-term treatment of serious infections from a variety of species of gram-negative bacteria. Prochlorperazine edisylate injection is indicated to control severe nausea and vomiting and for the treatment of schizophrenia.
The recall does not say which Emcure facility manufactured the products. In 2015, the FDA banned nearly all products coming out of Emcure's sterile manufacturing plant in Hinjawadi, India, and then followed up with a warning letter for the facility. The agency whipped the drugmaker for routinely using "fraudulent" test data to move drugs through the manufacturing process.
The agency then patted the company on the back for turning to consultants to help it solve its problems and changing some procedures and retraining employees. However, the FDA pointed out the facility should have known better because it had been previously warned about practices that could lead to drug contamination.
Emcure also has operations in Canada, having acquired Ottawa-based International Pharmaceutical Generics and its marketing operation Marcan Pharmaceuticals in 2016.
 Load-Date: May 31, 2019

 

End of Document


Drug recall Moses Lake Professional Pharmacy issues drug recall
Columbia Basin Herald, Moses Lake, Wash.
July 29, 2015 Wednesday

 Copyright 2015 Columbia Basin Herald
Distributed by Tribune Content Agency
Section: BUSINESS AND FINANCIAL NEWS
Length: 383 words
Byline: Richard Byrd, Columbia Basin Herald, Moses Lake, Wash.
Body




July 29--MOSES LAKE -- Moses Lake Professional Pharmacy is voluntarily recalling human and veterinary sterile compounded drugs that expired because of a lack of sterility assurance.
The Moses Lake Professional Pharmacy, which is located at 1555 Pilgrim St., has not yet received any reports of product contamination and is issuing the voluntary recall out of caution following a recent inspection that reportedly uncovered an issue with sterility assurance, according to a statement from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. If contamination is found in products that are intended to be sterile, patients are put at risk of "serious" infections that can be life-threatening.
The recalled products were made from July 21, 2014 through July 21, 2015 and dispensed to patients or distributed to physicians for further administration to patients in Arizona, Idaho, Florida, Oregon, Texas and Washington.
The recall does not include non-sterile compound medications prepared by the pharmacy or products that were "compounded" after July 21, 2015.
All products that are recalled have a label that includes the name of the pharmacy and the name of the compounded drug product, according to the FDA.
For a list of the recalled products visit www.fda.gov/Safety/Recalls/ucm455925.htm.
The pharmacy reportedly began notifying patients by telephone, fax, email and regular mail of the recall.
The FDA recommends users of the recalled products immediately stop using them and return them.
"We are fully cooperating with the FDA and we regret any impact this voluntary recall may have on our patients, and patient safety is our highest priority," Moses Lake Professional Pharmacy owner Shawn Needham said.
The recalled products can be returned by calling 509-764-2314.
Adverse reactions when using human drugs can be reported by visiting www.fda.gov/medwatch/report.htm,            www.fda.gov/MedWatch/getforms.htm or by calling 1-800-332-1088.
Adverse affects involving animals can be reported by visiting www.fda.gov/downloads/AboutFDA/ReportsManualsForms/Forms/AnimalDrugForms/ucm048817.pdf.
Richard Byrd can be reached via email at city@columbiabasinherald.com
___ (c)2015 the Columbia Basin Herald, Wash. Visit the Columbia Basin Herald, Wash. at www.columbiabasinherald.com Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.
 Load-Date: July 30, 2015

 

End of Document


Bedford Labs recalls cancer drug cytarabine
The Associated Press State & Local Wire
March 8, 2012 Thursday 7:22 PM GMT

 Copyright 2012 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 265 words
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




An Ohio drugmaker has recalled three production lots of cytarabine, a drug that is critical in treating leukemia but which has been in short supply because of previous recalls, the Food and Drug Administration disclosed Thursday.
Bedford Laboratories issued the voluntary recall last month because of concerns about sterility. It said no side effects have been reported, but an investigation of the manufacturing area found there was an elevated risk that the sterility of the drug could not be assured. The three production lots expire from March to May of 2014.
Cytarabine is a popular chemotherapy drug that is irreplaceable in fighting certain types of leukemia. Several other manufacturers stopped making the drug because of quality problems or a shortage of raw materials, which created a shortage of cytarabine.
Bedford Labs runs one of the largest manufacturing plants of sterile injectable drugs. It stopped producing cytarabine in November because it discovered that maintenance and testing of some of its equipment was overdue. It resumed production in the first quarter.
Recalls and manufacturing problems have also created shortages of two other popular cancer drugs: Doxil and preservative-free methotrexate. Doxil is used in the treatment of ovarian and other cancers, and preservative-free methotrexate is used against acute lymphoblastic leukemia, the most common type of cancer in children. Up to 90 percent of children treated with ALL are cured after treatment with methotrexate.
In February the FDA approved additional sources for the drugs in order to deal with the shortages.
 Load-Date: March 9, 2012

 

End of Document


Popular heartburn drugs are being recalled over cancer worries
CBS - 3 WREG (Memphis, Tennessee)
September 27, 2019 Friday

 Copyright 2019 Local TV LLC
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 337 words
Byline: Tribune Media Wire
Body




×
Popular heartburn drugs are being recalled over cancer worries
 Nearly two weeks after a probable carcinogen was detected at low levels in heartburn medications, the over-the-counter drugs are being recalled.
 Drug manufacturer Apotex said Thursday it's voluntarily recalling 75mg and 150mg ranitidine tablets sold at Walgreens, Walmart, and Rite Aid over the possible presence of cancer-causing impurity NDMA.
 USA Today notes the acid-reducing drugs are generic versions of Zantac. The FDA has the complete list of recalled products here. Earlier this week, Novartis-owned Sandoz recalled 30-count, 50-count and 500-count bottles of prescription ranitidine capsules, and overseas, British drugmaker GlaxoSmithKline is recalling ranitidine products in India and Hong Kong (it does not sell versions of the drug in the US). Several countries are taking steps to restrict sales of drugs containing ranitidine , ABC News reports.
 The FDA is testing Zantac and its generic versions, but has not yet asked drugmakers for a recall. And Sanofi, which produces the brand-name Zantac, is not yet making any moves.
 "The FDA reported that the levels of N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) in ranitidine in preliminary tests barely exceed amounts found in common foods," says a Sanofi spokesperson. "We are working closely with the FDA and are conducting our own robust investigations to ensure we continue to meet the highest quality safety and quality standards."
 NDMA and two other cancer-causing substances have also led to widespread recalls of blood pressure and heart medications since last year. Manufacturing flaws were blamed for that, but in this case, experts say it's likely that enzymes in a person's body react with the ranitidine molecule and actually create NDMA. See the FDA's updates here. (Read more drug recall stories.)
 More From Newser:
 *  3 Species Were Known to Go Through Menopause. Now It's 5
 *  New Python Hybrid May Spell Future Trouble in Everglades
 *  Entire Arctic Expedition Perished, but Not Because of Lead
 Load-Date: September 28, 2019

 

End of Document


Deaths tied to recalled drugs from Texas compounder
FiercePharma Manufacturing
August 15, 2013 Thursday

 Copyright 2013 Questex Media Group LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 484 words
Byline: Eric Palmer
Body




The FDA has been taking a tougher position on oversight of large compounding pharmacies after it was accused last year of doing too little to prevent a fatal outbreak of bacterial            meningitis tied to one of the operations. But the agency again finds itself the target of criticism with reports that two patients have died and drugs from a Texas compounder are suspected in an outbreak of bloodstream infections.
Texas authorities told the Austin American-Statesman that the cause of death has yet to be established, but the two patients were among 17 who have developed the infections after getting infusions of calcium gluconate manufactured by Specialty Compounding of Cedar Park, TX.
The FDA this week had the compounder recall all of its sterile products manufactured since May 9, saying culture samples from the drugs contained bacteria. "The FDA believes that use of these products would create an unacceptable risk for patients," said Janet Woodcock, M.D., director of the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER). "Giving a patient a contaminated injectable drug could result in a life-threatening infection."
But the agency came under fire from Public Citizen, a public interest group that has been a critic of the FDA oversight of compounding pharmacies. In a statement Wednesday, it pointed out that the FDA found quality and sterility questions at the compounder's plant during an inspection in March. Had the agency sought a recall at that point, the infections might have been avoided, it said. Public Citizen has asked for an investigation. "The FDA knew there was a serious problem here but didn't use its existing legal authority to take prompt, aggressive enforcement action against the company," said Michael Carome, director of Public Citizen's Health Research Group, in a statement.
Compounders traditionally were small operations that created custom drugs for hospitals and have been overseen by state authorities. But in the face of drug shortages, some have expanded nationwide and function more like drug manufacturers than pharmacies. After the meningitis outbreak last year that sickened hundreds, dozens fatally, the FDA began methodically inspecting the largest of the operations. But FDA Commissioner Margaret Hamburg has been called before both House and Senate committees to explain why the FDA had not done a better job of protecting citizens against poor-quality drugs made by compounders. She has said the FDA needs clearer authority and is supporting legislation pending in Congress that would establish that.
- read the Austin American-Statesman story
  - here's the Public Citizen            statement
  - see the FDA            recall
Related Articles: 
FDA: Infections prompt recall of all Specialty Compounding's sterile meds
           Compounder issues nationwide recall of 45 products
           Canada compounding pharmacy linked to weak chemo drugs
           FDA tracking down new outbreak tied to compounded drug
 Load-Date: August 17, 2013

 

End of Document


Popular heartburn drugs are being recalled over cancer worries
FOX - 8 WGHP (High Point, Greensboro, Winston-Salem, North Carolina)
September 27, 2019 Friday

 Copyright 2019 Local TV LLC
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 337 words
Byline: Tribune Media Wire
Body




×
Popular heartburn drugs are being recalled over cancer worries
 Nearly two weeks after a probable carcinogen was detected at low levels in heartburn medications, the over-the-counter drugs are being recalled.
 Drug manufacturer Apotex said Thursday it's voluntarily recalling 75mg and 150mg ranitidine tablets sold at Walgreens, Walmart, and Rite Aid over the possible presence of cancer-causing impurity NDMA.
 USA Today notes the acid-reducing drugs are generic versions of Zantac. The FDA has the complete list of recalled products here. Earlier this week, Novartis-owned Sandoz recalled 30-count, 50-count and 500-count bottles of prescription ranitidine capsules, and overseas, British drugmaker GlaxoSmithKline is recalling ranitidine products in India and Hong Kong (it does not sell versions of the drug in the US). Several countries are taking steps to restrict sales of drugs containing ranitidine , ABC News reports.
 The FDA is testing Zantac and its generic versions, but has not yet asked drugmakers for a recall. And Sanofi, which produces the brand-name Zantac, is not yet making any moves.
 "The FDA reported that the levels of N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) in ranitidine in preliminary tests barely exceed amounts found in common foods," says a Sanofi spokesperson. "We are working closely with the FDA and are conducting our own robust investigations to ensure we continue to meet the highest quality safety and quality standards."
 NDMA and two other cancer-causing substances have also led to widespread recalls of blood pressure and heart medications since last year. Manufacturing flaws were blamed for that, but in this case, experts say it's likely that enzymes in a person's body react with the ranitidine molecule and actually create NDMA. See the FDA's updates here. (Read more drug recall stories.)
 More From Newser:
 *  3 Species Were Known to Go Through Menopause. Now It's 5
 *  New Python Hybrid May Spell Future Trouble in Everglades
 *  Entire Arctic Expedition Perished, but Not Because of Lead
 Load-Date: September 28, 2019

 

End of Document


The FDA expands recall of blood pressure drugs again
CNN.com
September 23, 2019 Monday 10:04 PM EST

 Copyright 2019 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved
 
Section: HEALTH
Length: 284 words
Byline: By Nadia Kounang, Jen Christensen and Debra Goldschmidt, CNN
Body




Torrent Pharmaceuticals Ltd. has expanded its voluntary recall of two blood pressure medications after trace amounts of a potentially cancer-causing impurity were found during testing.
The recall affects Losartan Potassium Tablets USP and Losartan Potassium/hydrochlorothiazide tablets.
Tests of some of those medications revealed amounts of N-methylnitrosobutyric acid (NMBA) that were above the US Food and Drug Administration's daily acceptable levels.
This recall is related to the valsartan recall that has been expanded multiple times since July, when separate lots of blood pressure medications from different companies began being pulled from pharmacy shelves.
The medications all contained either valsartan, losartan or irbesartan and had traces of these impurities that pose a cancer risk to users.
The FDA has begun testing all heart drugs called angiotensin II receptor blockers for these impurities. Also known as ARBs, they block a potent chemical in the blood called angiotensin that causes muscles surrounding blood vessels to contract. When the chemical binds, it narrows the vessels, and that can cause high blood pressure.
What this recall includes
This current expansion includes three additional lots of Losartan Potassium Tablets USP and two lots of Losartan Potassium/Hydrochlorothiazide Tablets, USP.
Patients currently taking the medication should continue doing so "as the risk of harm to the patient's health may be higher if the treatment is stopped immediately without any alternative treatment," the FDA said in a press release.
While it is unclear exactly what the cancer risk is of continuing to take the medication, the FDA believes that the risk was low with the recall of valsartan.
 Load-Date: September 24, 2019

 

End of Document


The FDA expands recall of blood pressure drugs again
CNN Wire
September 24, 2019 Tuesday 2:04 AM GMT

 Copyright 2019 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved
Length: 300 words
Byline: By Nadia Kounang, Jen Christensen and Debra Goldschmidt, CNN
Dateline: (CNN) 
Body




 (CNN) --  Torrent Pharmaceuticals Ltd. has expanded its voluntary recall of two blood pressure medications after trace amounts of a potentially cancer-causing impurity were found during testing.
The recall affects Losartan Potassium Tablets USP and Losartan Potassium/hydrochlorothiazide tablets.
Tests of some of those medications revealed amounts of N-methylnitrosobutyric acid (NMBA) that were above the US Food and Drug Administration's daily acceptable levels.
This recall is related to the valsartan recall that has been expanded multiple times since July, when separate lots of blood pressure medications from different companies began being pulled from pharmacy shelves. 
The medications all contained either valsartan, losartan or irbesartan and had traces of these impurities that pose a cancer risk to users. 
The FDA has begun testing all heart drugs called angiotensin II receptor blockers for these impurities. Also known as ARBs, they block a potent chemical in the blood called angiotensin that causes muscles surrounding blood vessels to contract. When the chemical binds, it narrows the vessels, and that can cause high blood pressure.
What this recall includes
This current expansion includes three additional lots of Losartan Potassium Tablets USP and two lots of Losartan Potassium/Hydrochlorothiazide Tablets, USP.
Patients currently taking the medication should continue doing so "as the risk of harm to the patient's health may be higher if the treatment is stopped immediately without any alternative treatment," the FDA said in a press release. 
While it is unclear exactly what the cancer risk is of continuing to take the medication, the FDA believes that the risk was low with the recall of valsartan.
TM & © 2019 Cable News Network, Inc., a Time Warner Company. All rights reserved.
 Load-Date: September 24, 2019

 

End of Document


DRL continues recall of anti-epilepsy drug from US
Times of India (Electronic Edition)
February 8, 2019 Friday
Hyderabad Edition

 Copyright 2019 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: TIMES BUSINESS
Length: 320 words
Byline: TIMES NEWS NETWORK
Body




Dr Reddy's Laboratories Ltd has announced that its wholly-owned subsidiary, Dr Reddy's Laboratories Inc, is continuing its voluntary nationwide recall of a lot of its anti-epilepsy drug — Levetiracetam in 0.54% Sodium Chloride Injection, 1,500 mg/100 mL (15 mg/ mL) — in single-dose infusion bags to the hospital level in the US. “The recall, which began in October 2018, was originally initiated due to a product complaint received for mislabeling. The pre-printed text content on the infusion bag (primary container) for the lot indicates product information as Levetiracetam in 0.75% Sodium Chloride Injection (1000mg/100ml). The label on the external foil pouch has the product information as Levetiracetam in 0.54% Sodium Chloride Injection (1500mg/100ml),” the company informed the US drug regulator US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA).
The company said in its recall letter that patients who may have been administered the mislabeled product could experience adverse reactions such as somnolence, agitation, aggression, depressed level of consciousness, respiratory depression and coma related to over dosage.
However, DRL said that “to date, there have been no reports of adverse events related to this recall” for the batch was distributed in the US between August 14, 2018, and September 5, 2018.
The Hyderabad-based pharma player said its US arm has notified the distributors to arrange for return of any recalled product and said “wholesalers, distributors, hospitals and pharmacies with an existing inventory of the lot being recalled, should stop use and distribution and quarantine the product immediately for return/replacement/ etc of all recalled products”.
Wholesalers, distributors and pharmacies that have further distributed the recalled product should notify any accounts or additional locations which may have received the recalled product from them, the company said in its recall letter to USFDA.
 Load-Date: February 7, 2019

 

End of Document


Blood Pressure Drugs Recall: What To Do If Your Prescription Meds Are Affected
Medical Daily
August 7, 2019 Wednesday 7:45 AM EST

 Copyright 2019 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 457 words
Body




Aug 07, 2019( Medical Daily: http://www.medicaldaily.com Delivered by Newstex)  The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recently recalled angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARB) due to contamination. The medications were found containing the chemical compound nitrosamine that hasbeen linked to cancer.The FDA confirmedthe contamination in two drug manufacturing factories in China and India. 
Officials believed problems with the manufacturing process potentially exposed the drugs to the potentially harmful compounds, N-Nitrosodiethylamine (NDEA) and N-Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA).The latestrecall affected losartan (Cozaar), valsartan (Diovan and Prexxartan) and irbesartan (Avapro).ARBs are known for helping reduce blood pressure.Doctors also prescribe ARBs to help reduce complications related to heart failure and chronic kidney disease caused by diabetes. The recalled drugs were used in 61 million prescriptions in 2016 in the U.S., according to James Song-Jeng Yeh, an instructor in medicine at Harvard Medical School.What To Do With Your Recalled Blood Pressure MedicationsDo not immediately stop taking your medications despite being included on the contaminated list. It is important to ask your pharmacy first if your drugs are affected.If yes, consult your doctor if you should take alternative drugs.'Right now, there is no evidence to suggest that individuals who were exposed to nitrosamine-contaminated medications need more frequent cancer screenings,' Yeh, who also practices internal medicine at Massachusetts General Hospital, said in a blog post[1]. 'But these individuals, like everyone, should ensure that they are up to date with cancer screening recommendations.'Contaminated Blood Pressure DrugsThe FDA found that the drugs have been contaminated for up to four years. Estimates showed that nearly two million people were exposed to the cancer-linked compounds over the past years.However, the agency noted the patients have a low risk of developing the disease. For example, a daily dose of valsartan may cause only one cancer in 8,000 individuals.A separate study in Denmark also found no evidence of valsartan causing cancer after long-term use. Researchers analyzed the health of more than 5,000 cancer-free adults from 2012 to 2018.'They did not find any increased risk of cancer in those that received potentially NDMA-contaminated valsartan as compared to those that received non-contaminated valsartan,' Yeh said. New drug helps people reduce heart failure risk by more than 30 percent as well as chances of suffering major cardiovascular conditions by nearly 20 percent. Pixabay [ 1]: https://www.health.harvard.edu/blog/what-should-you-do-if-your-blood-pressure-medication-has-been-recalled-2019080517434 
 Load-Date: August 7, 2019

 

End of Document


Wockhardt to recall drugs made in India after US FDA quality concerns
UNI (United News of India)
April 28, 2015 Tuesday

 Copyright 2015 UNI All Rights Reserved
Length: 238 words
Dateline: New Delhi 
Body




New Delhi, April 28 -- Drug major Wockhardt Ltd today said it will recall some drugs as a measure of preparedness and precaution, manufactured at its two plants in Aurangabad, Maharashtra before the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) banned those sites due to quality concerns.
''During the last US FDA CGMP inspection of the facilities at L1- Chikalthana and Waluj in Aurangabad, Maharashtra, some observations were reported pertaining to batches of some products manufactured prior to the US FDA import alerts,'' the company said in a statement.
As a measure of preparedness and as an abundant precaution, the company has now decided to recall, as a part of remedial measure all the remaining batches in the US market that were manufactured prior to the US FDA import alerts even though there is no evidence of risk to patient safety from the products currently available in the US market, it said.
Additionally, the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory (MHRA), UK has restored the EU Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) certification of the company's potent product facility at Kadaiya, Daman, it said.
The FDA had banned US exports from Wockhardt's plants in India in 2013, recognising manufacturing quality lapses.
Published by HT Syndication with permission from United News of India. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com
 Load-Date: April 28, 2015

 

End of Document


Popular heartburn drugs are being recalled over cancer worries
FOX - 31 KDVR (Denver)
September 27, 2019 Friday

 Copyright 2019 Local TV LLC
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: TRENDING
Length: 327 words
Byline: Tribune Media Wire
Body




Nearly two weeks after a probable carcinogen was detected at low levels in heartburn medications, the over-the-counter drugs are being recalled.
Drug manufacturer Apotex said Thursday it's voluntarily recalling 75mg and 150mg ranitidine tablets sold at Walgreens, Walmart, and Rite Aid over the possible presence of cancer-causing impurity NDMA.
 USA Today notes the acid-reducing drugs are generic versions of Zantac. The FDA has the complete list of recalled products here. Earlier this week, Novartis-owned Sandoz recalled 30-count, 50-count and 500-count bottles of prescription ranitidine capsules, and overseas, British drugmaker GlaxoSmithKline is recalling ranitidine products in India and Hong Kong (it does not sell versions of the drug in the US). Several countries are taking steps to restrict sales of drugs containing ranitidine , ABC News reports.
 The FDA is testing Zantac and its generic versions, but has not yet asked drugmakers for a recall. And Sanofi, which produces the brand-name Zantac, is not yet making any moves.
 "The FDA reported that the levels of N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) in ranitidine in preliminary tests barely exceed amounts found in common foods," says a Sanofi spokesperson. "We are working closely with the FDA and are conducting our own robust investigations to ensure we continue to meet the highest quality safety and quality standards."
 NDMA and two other cancer-causing substances have also led to widespread recalls of blood pressure and heart medications since last year. Manufacturing flaws were blamed for that, but in this case, experts say it's likely that enzymes in a person's body react with the ranitidine molecule and actually create NDMA. See the FDA's updates here. (Read more drug recall stories.)
 More From Newser:
 *  3 Species Were Known to Go Through Menopause. Now It's 5
 *  New Python Hybrid May Spell Future Trouble in Everglades
 *  Entire Arctic Expedition Perished, but Not Because of Lead
 AlertMe
 Load-Date: September 28, 2019

 

End of Document


Popular heartburn drugs are being recalled over cancer worries
FOX - 8 WGHP (High Point, Greensboro, Winston-Salem, North Carolina)
September 27, 2019 Friday

 Copyright 2019 Local TV LLC
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 325 words
Byline: Tribune Media Wire
Body




Nearly two weeks after a probable carcinogen was detected at low levels in heartburn medications, the over-the-counter drugs are being recalled.
Drug manufacturer Apotex said Thursday it's voluntarily recalling 75mg and 150mg ranitidine tablets sold at Walgreens, Walmart, and Rite Aid over the possible presence of cancer-causing impurity NDMA.
 USA Today notes the acid-reducing drugs are generic versions of Zantac. The FDA has the complete list of recalled products here. Earlier this week, Novartis-owned Sandoz recalled 30-count, 50-count and 500-count bottles of prescription ranitidine capsules, and overseas, British drugmaker GlaxoSmithKline is recalling ranitidine products in India and Hong Kong (it does not sell versions of the drug in the US). Several countries are taking steps to restrict sales of drugs containing ranitidine , ABC News reports.
 The FDA is testing Zantac and its generic versions, but has not yet asked drugmakers for a recall. And Sanofi, which produces the brand-name Zantac, is not yet making any moves.
 "The FDA reported that the levels of N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) in ranitidine in preliminary tests barely exceed amounts found in common foods," says a Sanofi spokesperson. "We are working closely with the FDA and are conducting our own robust investigations to ensure we continue to meet the highest quality safety and quality standards."
 NDMA and two other cancer-causing substances have also led to widespread recalls of blood pressure and heart medications since last year. Manufacturing flaws were blamed for that, but in this case, experts say it's likely that enzymes in a person's body react with the ranitidine molecule and actually create NDMA. See the FDA's updates here. (Read more drug recall stories.)
 More From Newser:
 * 3 Species Were Known to Go Through Menopause. Now It's 5
 * New Python Hybrid May Spell Future Trouble in Everglades
 * Entire Arctic Expedition Perished, but Not Because of Lead
 Load-Date: May 20, 2020

 

End of Document


Popular heartburn drugs are being recalled over cancer worries
FOX - 2 KTVI (St. Louis)
September 28, 2019 Saturday

 Copyright 2019 Local TV LLC
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 325 words
Byline: Tribune Media
Body




Nearly two weeks after a probable carcinogen was detected at low levels in heartburn medications, the over-the-counter drugs are being recalled.
Drug manufacturer Apotex said Thursday it's voluntarily recalling 75mg and 150mg ranitidine tablets sold at Walgreens, Walmart, and Rite Aid over the possible presence of cancer-causing impurity NDMA.
 USA Today notes the acid-reducing drugs are generic versions of Zantac. The FDA has the complete list of recalled products here. Earlier this week, Novartis-owned Sandoz recalled 30-count, 50-count and 500-count bottles of prescription ranitidine capsules, and overseas, British drugmaker GlaxoSmithKline is recalling ranitidine products in India and Hong Kong (it does not sell versions of the drug in the US). Several countries are taking steps to restrict sales of drugs containing ranitidine , ABC News reports.
 The FDA is testing Zantac and its generic versions, but has not yet asked drugmakers for a recall. And Sanofi, which produces the brand-name Zantac, is not yet making any moves.
 "The FDA reported that the levels of N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) in ranitidine in preliminary tests barely exceed amounts found in common foods," says a Sanofi spokesperson. "We are working closely with the FDA and are conducting our own robust investigations to ensure we continue to meet the highest quality safety and quality standards."
 NDMA and two other cancer-causing substances have also led to widespread recalls of blood pressure and heart medications since last year. Manufacturing flaws were blamed for that, but in this case, experts say it's likely that enzymes in a person's body react with the ranitidine molecule and actually create NDMA. See the FDA's updates here. (Read more drug recall stories.)
 More From Newser:
 * 3 Species Were Known to Go Through Menopause. Now It's 5
 * New Python Hybrid May Spell Future Trouble in Everglades
 * Entire Arctic Expedition Perished, but Not Because of Lead
 Load-Date: May 22, 2020

 

End of Document


European regulator launches review of recalled heart drug
Agence France Presse -- English
August 2, 2018 Thursday 4:56 PM GMT

 Copyright 2018 Agence France Presse All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 303 words
Dateline: London, Aug 2 2018
Body




The European Medicines Agency (EMA) said Thursday it is conducting a review of the health effects on patients of a widely used blood pressure medication recalled around the world last month.
The regulator will analyse the impact of active ingredient valsartan, produced by Chinese manufacturer Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceutical Company, after warnings of contamination by a cancer-causing impurity.
The company, listed on the Shanghai stock exchange, launched a global recall of the drug on July 18 following warnings by US and European regulators over the presence of N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), which is believed to potentially cause cancer through long-term use.
In a series of pronouncements last month, Huahai said it had moved to suspend supply and had begun the recall.
Valsartan is a generic drug mainly used for treatment of high blood pressure and congestive heart failure.
NDMA was an unexpected impurity believed to have formed as a side product after Huahai introduced changes to its manufacturing process in 2012, according to the London-based EMA.
It first issued an alert over the drug on July 5, and American regulators followed up with their own warning a week later.
The EMA repeated Thursday that there was "no immediate risk to patients" and they "should not stop taking their medicines without consulting their doctor or pharmacist".
The EMA said its review is being carried out by the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use, which is responsible for probing concerns over patient medicines.
Its opinion will be forwarded to the European Commission, which will issue a final legally binding decision applicable in all countries in the EU.
Huahai's stock has dropped more than 20 percent since the warnings first emerged in early July.
The company could not be reached for immediate comment on Thursday.
 Load-Date: August 3, 2018

 

End of Document


2 Texas patients who received recalled drug die
The Associated Press State & Local Wire
August 15, 2013 Thursday 1:48 AM GMT

 Copyright 2013 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 602 words
Byline: By JUAN CARLOS LLORCA, Associated Press
Dateline: EL PASO Texas
Body




Texas health officials say no link has been found between a compounded drug and the death of two patients who developed blood infections after receiving it before its recall.
The federal Food and Drug Administration recalled all products produced by Specialty Compounding of Cedar Park, Texas, after reports of bacterial infections affecting 17 patients at two Corpus Christi hospitals. Two of the patients died, but Chris Van Deusen, spokesman for the Texas Department of State Health Services, said that the cause of death is not yet known and no link between the medication and the deaths has been established.
Texas health officials are working with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, a federal health agency in Atlanta. CDC is analyzing samples of the bacteria taken from the patients to see if they're all the same strain and come from the same source. Results are expected next week.
Texas officials told the CDC that the patients who received calcium gluconate manufactured by Specialty Compounding developed bloodstream infections and that most of the infections were caused by Rhodococcus equi, which causes illness in horses. It's rarely seen in people, though there have been reports of it in people with weakened immune systems specifically AIDS patients.
An intact sample of the calcium gluconate made by the firm showed growth of bacteria of the Rhodococcus species, the CDC said in a statement.
The company has voluntarily recalled all the products it has manufactured and distributed since May 9, however the common treatment in all cases was calcium gluconate. It said the products were sent directly to patients nationwide, except in North Carolina. They were also distributed to Texas hospitals and physicians.
CDC officials described calcium gluconate as a drug to help people with low calcium levels. That can include heart patients, cancer patients or others. The drug is not specifically for any particular disease, but to bring up calcium levels and counterbalance high levels of magnesium or potassium.
In October, hundreds of people were infected in a fungal meningitis outbreak that was linked to contaminated steroid injections for back pain. The outbreak been blamed for at least 50 deaths nationwide.
Compounding pharmacies mix customized injections, creams and other medications in formulas specified by doctors. They have traditionally been overseen by the 50 state boards of pharmacy across the U.S. But those bodies have struggled to police larger compounding operations that have emerged in recent years, producing medications in bulk and shipping them across state lines.
The New England Compounding Center, the pharmacy at center of the meningitis outbreak, shipped more than 17,600 doses of the pain injection implicated in the case.
Dr. Carmen Catizone, the director of the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy told Senate lawmakers last May that these large compounders are essentially manufacturers, and should be regulated by the Food and Drug Administration.
A Senate proposal, drafted by a bipartisan group of lawmakers, calls these operations "compounding manufacturers," and requires them to register with FDA and meet the same quality control standards as pharmaceutical giants like Pfizer Inc. and Eli Lilly & Co. Traditional compounding pharmacies, generally small operations that work with individual doctors, would continue to be regulated by state pharmacy boards.
Since 2001, there have been 75 reported deaths and more than 1,020 illnesses connected with compounded drugs, according to an assessment released by the Pew Charitable Trusts at the hearing.
 Load-Date: August 15, 2013

 

End of Document


FDA REQUESTS RECALL OF STERILE COMPOUNDED DRUG PRODUCTS PRODUCED BY PACIFICO NATIONAL INC
US Fed News
August 27, 2019 Tuesday 6:09 PM  EST

 Copyright 2019 HT Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Length: 823 words
Body




SILVER SPRING, Md., Aug. 27 -- The U.S. Department of Health &#38; Human Services' Food &#38; Drug Administration issued the following press release:
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration is reminding patients and health care professionals not to use drug products intended to be sterile made by Pacifico National Inc., an outsourcing facility doing business as AmEx Pharmacy, in Melbourne, Florida. The drugs-which include compounded ophthalmic products among other drug products - pose unnecessary risks due to significant quality and sterility concerns.
"When the FDA becomes aware of drugs that have the potential to cause harm to American consumers, we will alert the public, Prior to today's outreach, AmEx Pharmacy refused to recall all sterile drug products and has not adequately addressed FDA's concern that it is manufacturing drugs that are not in line with the quality standards we've set, putting patients at risk," said Acting FDA Commissioner Ned Sharpless, M.D. "We urge drug manufacturers and compounders to take appropriate action to ensure quality medicines as the agency continues our efforts to protect public health."
An FDA inspection of AmEx Pharmacy's facility found conditions that could cause the company's drugs to become contaminated or otherwise pose risks to patients. As a result, the agency recommended on June 25that AmEx Pharmacy voluntarily recall all unexpired drugs intended to be sterile and cease sterile operations until the company takes adequate corrective actions. However, AmEx Pharmacy declined to initiate a recall of all unexpired drugs intended to be sterile and has not provided adequate assurances regarding the sterility and quality of its remaining and newly manufactured products.
Because of this, the agency today issued a formal request to the outsourcing facility to recall all non-expired lots of drugs intended to be sterile. The FDA is also urging consumers to stop using these drugs and dispose of them immediately. Additionally, the agency is requesting the outsourcing facility cease production of drugs intended to be sterile until adequate remediation actions have been taken.
Administration of a non-sterile drug intended to be sterile presents the risk of infection. Intraocular medications which are not sterile can lead to intraocular infections such as endophthalmitis which, depending on the infecting microorganism, can lead to a loss of partial or total permanent visual function (i.e., no light perception). Patients who have concerns about receiving any drug produced by AmEx Pharmacy or who observe signs of an infection after using these medicines should contact their health care professional.
Health care professionals should immediately check their medical supplies, quarantine any drugs intended to be sterile and prepared by AmEx Pharmacy, and not administer or provide them to patients. The FDA urges health care professionals who obtained drugs from AmEx Pharmacy to make alternative arrangements to obtain medications from sources that adhere to proper quality standards.
"Although compounded drugs can serve an important need for some patients, they present a higher risk because they do not undergo premarket review to ensure that they are safe and effective for their intended use and to verify their manufacturing quality," said Donald D. Ashley, director of compliance for the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. "The agency's compounding program aims to protect patients from unsafe, ineffective and poor-quality compounded drugs, while preserving access to compounded drugs for patients for whom an FDA-approved drug is not medically appropriate."
The FDA has received reports of adverse events associated with the use of AmEx Pharmacy's drugs. The FDA encourages health care professionals and consumers to report adverse events to the FDA's MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program:
* Complete and submit the report online at www.fda.gov/medwatch/report.htm; or
* Download and complete the form, then submit it via fax at 1-800-FDA-0178.
AmEx Pharmacy is registered as an outsourcing facility under section 503B of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. The Drug Quality and Security Act, signed into law on Nov. 27, 2013, added a new section 503B to the FD&#38;C Act. Under section 503B, a compounder can elect to register as an outsourcing facility.
The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, and security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The agency also is responsible for the safety and security of our nation's food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation, and for regulating tobacco products. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
 Load-Date: August 28, 2019

 

End of Document


USFDA Raps Sun for Laxity in Follow-up for Recalled Drugs
Economic Times (E-Paper Edition)
October 11, 2014 Saturday
Kolkata Edition

 Copyright 2014 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: COMPANIES & ECONOMY
Length: 480 words
Byline: Soma.Das1@timesgroup.com
Body




India's top drug maker Sun Pharmaceutical Industries has received a rap from the United States regulator for being lax in monitoring the follow-up corrective actions for the drugs it recalled from the US market early this year.
The company has not put in place a proper formalised corrective and preventive action plan for the diabetes drug (Metformin extended release) it recalled, the US Food & Drug Administration investigators noted after inspecting Sun Pharma's Halol plant in Gujarat last month, according to a copy of form 483 reviewed by ET.
The form is used by the FDA to document concerns discovered during its inspections.
The company failed in the requisite measures despite telling the US government that "all the (corrective) actions (related to Metformin drug recall) have been implemented", the investigators added.
Similarly, the company did not put in place any formal corrective plans for anxiety drug Venlafaxine Hydrochloride extended release tablets, for which it initiated a recall four months ago, the inspectors noted.
They further noted that the building used in the manufacturing of a drug product "is not maintained in a good state of repair". "For example, on September 8, 2014 we observed water stains with ceiling damage and on September 12, 2014 we observed water leaks from the ceiling in the personnel corridor of the parenteral manufacturing area," the team of FDA investigators Parul Patel, Daniel Roberts and
Thomas Arista noted.
These are part of 23 adverse observations that the investigators have made in three separate categories - unit for making solid drugs (tablets, capsules), parenteral drugs (injectables, intravenous products) and the quality control lab.
A Sun Pharma spokesperson refused to comment on the matter.
Analysts who have reviewed the document felt the chances of the US FDA blocking imports from the plant are slim but do not rule out future product approvals from the plant getting blocked. This could adversely impact the company's growth prospects in the US.
"There are no data integrity issues in the form and therefore chances of import alert are low. However, observations include several procedural issues where resolution could take time and till then approvals could be blocked possibly," Anubhav Aggarwal of brokerage Credit Suisse said in a report.
This will impact the company's growth since its fastest growing division has been the US sales from the Indian plants, said the report, which estimated that the facility accounted for about 20-25% of the company's profits.
Another Gujarat-based plant of Sun Pharma at Karkhadi was banned from shipping to the US early this year.
The FDA investigators also objected to the practice of four-five individuals accessing sensitive production equipment through a common password.
They chided the firm for not documenting alarm events that occur during the routine tablet compression.
 Load-Date: October 11, 2014

 

End of Document


Drug maker expands recall for infant ibuprofen over dosage concern
UPI
January 31, 2019 Thursday 9:09 AM EST

 Copyright 2019 U.P.I. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 216 words
Byline: NICHOLAS SAKELARIS
Dateline: Dec. 31 
Body





Pharmaceutical officials are expanding a recall for a generic brand of infant ibuprofen due to concerns it has a higher dose than labeled.
Tris Pharma initially recalled ibuprofen sold under the Walmart, CVS Pharmacy and Family Dollar brands, but has now expanded the warning to other products manufactured for CVS and Walmart. The company said it affects 50-milligram bottles.
No serious adverse effects have been reported, Tris Pharma said in a statement this week.
"The reason for the recall was a potential higher concentration of ibuprofen of less than 10 percent above the specific limit in some bottles from these three batches," it added. "Safety issues or toxicity is generally accepted to be a concern in infants at doses in excess of 700 percent of the recommended dose."
The company said infants already susceptible to adverse effects of ibuprofen are at greater risk with the recalled drugs. A "remote possibility," Tris Pharma said, could be permanent kidney damage in certain infants.
Other adverse effects could include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, ringing ears, headaches and gastrointestinal bleeding.
The decision to recall the drugs was based on an evaluation by the , officials said.
Tris Pharma said parents unsure if they should throw away medication should contact their physician.
 Load-Date: February 1, 2019

 

End of Document


GSK recalls popular heartburn drug Zantac globally after cancer scare
Channel NewsAsia
October 8, 2019 Tuesday 3:30 PM GMT

 Copyright 2019 MCN International Pte Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: WORLD
Length: 534 words
Body




REUTERS: GlaxoSmithKline on Tuesday said it is recalling the popular heartburn medicine Zantac in all markets as a "precaution", days after the U.S. Food and Drug Administration found "unacceptable" levels of probable cancer-causing impurity in the drug. Zantac, also sold generically as ranitidine, is the latest drug in which cancer-causing impurities have been found. Regulators have been recalling some blood pressure and heart failure medicines since last year. Britain's medicines watchdog said GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) was recalling four prescription-only Zantac medicines: a syrup, an injection and tablets of 150 and 300 milligram (mg) dosages. (https://bit.ly/2IATooO) Over-the-counter 75 mg dosage Zantac products are produced by a different company and are not affected by the recall, it added. 
"GSK informed the MHRA of our decision to suspend the release, distribution and supply of all dose forms of Zantac products," a company spokesman confirmed to Reuters. "GSK is continuing with investigations into the potential source of the NDMA," he said, adding that the investigations include continued engagement with its suppliers and with external laboratories to conduct tests on finished product batches of Zantac. The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) said healthcare professionals were told on Monday to "stop supplying the products immediately, quarantine all remaining stock and return it to their supplier". "We are advising that patients should not to stop taking their medication, and do not need to see their doctor until their next routine appointment but should seek their doctor's advice if they have any concerns," the MHRA said. GLOBAL STOPPAGE U.S. and European health regulators said last month they were reviewing the safety of ranitidine, after online pharmacy Valisure flagged the impurities. The FDA said Valisure's higher-temperature testing method generated very high levels of NDMA from the ranitidine drugs. NDMA had previously been found in some blood pressure medicines from a class of drugs known as angiotensin II receptor blockers, or ARBs. After checking the over-the-counter drugs using a low-heat method of testing, the FDA said it found much lower levels of NDMA than was discovered with a higher temperature test employed by Valisure. The U.S. regulator has asked ranitidine makers to conduct their own testing to assess levels of the impurity and to send samples of their products for testing by the agency. Swiss drugmaker Novartis halted global distribution of its ranitidine drugs last month. Last week, Walmart Inc joined pharmacy chains CVS Health Corp , Walgreens Boots Alliance Inc and Rite Aid Corp in suspending the sale of over-the-counter heartburn drugs containing ranitidine. Canada's health authorities have asked makers of the drugs to halt distribution as they gather more information. Last month, regulators in Hong Kong pulled four products, while in Ireland 13 products containing ranitidine were recalled. The impurity was believed to have been introduced by changes in the manufacturing process. (Reporting by Justin George Varghese in Bengaluru; Editing by Deepa Babington, Mark Potter and Dan Grebler) - Reuters
 Load-Date: October 8, 2019

 

End of Document


Bono Mack slams FDA for failing to recall drugs
The Hill
January 18, 2012 Wednesday

 Copyright  2012 Capitol Hill Publishing Corp. All Rights Reserved
Section: Pg. 10
Length: 286 words
Byline: By Julian Pecquet
Body




Rep. Mary Bono Mack (R-Calif.) on Tuesday accused federal regulators of being asleep at the switch when they failed to issue a recall of mislabeled painkillers.  Bono Mack said the agency knew about problems at a Novartis manufacturing facility in Nebraska for years but failed to take action until the drugmaker voluntarily closed its facility and issued a recall for over-the-counter medications in the past few weeks. The facility has received 12 citations for quality-control problems and 166 complaints of mixed pills in bottles since 2009, Bono Mack said. “I am outraged at the lack of leadership shown by FDA to guarantee the safety of patients across the country, and it perplexes me that inspectors continued citing problems with the facility without holding Novartis accountable,” Bono Mack wrote in a HYPERLINK "http://bono.house.gov/News/DocumentSingle.aspx?DocumentID=274996" letter to Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Margaret Hamburg. 
“If FDA had taken a more proactive, consistent role in the ongoing inspections, the recall by Novartis could have been avoided and consumers would not be at risk of accidentally taking prescription painkillers in place of over-the-counter drugs such as Gas-X.” A spokeswoman for the FDA wrote in an email that the agency “did not believe that a recall was warranted” for several reasons, including the very low risk of a medication mix-up and the fact that the pharmacist serves as an additional quality-control check in such cases. Bono Mack, a high-ranking member of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, is a leader of congressional efforts to limit deaths from painkiller overdoses, which now surpass the number of deaths from cocaine and heroin combined.
 Load-Date: February 13, 2012

 

End of Document


European regulator launches review of recalled heart drug
Digital Journal
August 2, 2018 Thursday 6:17 PM EST

 Copyright 2018 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 317 words
Body




Aug 02, 2018( Digital Journal: http://www.digitaljournal.com Delivered by Newstex)  The European Medicines Agency (EMA) said Thursday it is conducting a review of the health effects on patients of a widely used blood pressure medication recalled around the world last month.The regulator will analyse the impact of active ingredient valsartan, produced by Chinese manufacturer Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceutical Company, after warnings of contamination by a cancer-causing impurity.The company, listed on the Shanghai stock exchange, launched a global recall of the drug on July 18 following warnings by US and European regulators over the presence of N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), which is believed to potentially cause cancer through long-term use.In a series of pronouncements last month, Huahai said it had moved to suspend supply and had begun the recall.Valsartan is a generic drug mainly used for treatment of high blood pressure and congestive heart failure.NDMA was an unexpected impurity believed to have formed as a side product after Huahai introduced changes to its manufacturing process in 2012, according to the London-based EMA.It first issued an alert over the drug on July 5, and American regulators followed up with their own warning a week later.The EMA repeated Thursday that there was "no immediate risk to patients" and they "should not stop taking their medicines without consulting their doctor or pharmacist".The EMA said its review is being carried out by the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use, which is responsible for probing concerns over patient medicines.Its opinion will be forwarded to the European Commission, which will issue a final legally binding decision applicable in all countries in the EU.Huahai's stock has dropped more than 20 percent since the warnings first emerged in early July.The company could not be reached for immediate comment on Thursday. 
 Load-Date: August 2, 2018

 

End of Document


Bono Mack slams FDA for failing to recall drugs
The Hill
January 18, 2012 Wednesday

 Copyright  2012 Capitol Hill Publishing Corp. All Rights Reserved
Section: Pg. 10
Length: 287 words
Byline: By Julian Pecquet
Body




Rep. Mary Bono Mack (R-Calif.) on Tuesday accused federal regulators of being asleep at the switch when they failed to issue a recall of mislabeled painkillers.Â 
Bono Mack said the agency knew about problems at a Novartis manufacturing facility in Nebraska for years but failed to take action until the drugmaker voluntarily closed its facility and issued a recall for over-the-counter medications in the past few weeks.
The facility has received 12 citations for quality-control problems and 166 complaints of mixed pills in bottles since 2009, Bono Mack said.
â*œI am outraged at the lack of leadership shown by FDA to guarantee the safety of patients across the country, and it perplexes me that inspectors continued citing problems with the facility without holding Novartis accountable,â€ Bono Mack wrote in a HYPERLINK "http://bono.house.gov/News/DocumentSingle.aspx?DocumentID=274996"letter to Food and Drug Administration Commissioner Margaret Hamburg.
â*œIf FDA had taken a more proactive, consistent role in the ongoing inspections, the recall by Novartis could have been avoided and consumers would not be at risk of accidentally taking prescription painkillers in place of over-the-counter drugs such as Gas-X.â€
A spokeswoman for the FDA wrote in an email that the agency â*œdid not believe that a recall was warrantedâ€ for several reasons, including the very low risk of a medication mix-up and the fact that the pharmacist serves as an additional quality-control check in such cases.
Bono Mack, a high-ranking member of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, is a leader of congressional efforts to limit deaths from painkiller overdoses, which now surpass the number of deaths from cocaine and heroin combined.
 Load-Date: April 4, 2012

 

End of Document


Mylan recalls Bengaluru unit cancer drug; US company recalling two drugs manufactured by Agila Onco, which it bought from Strides Arcolab two years back
DNA
June 16, 2015 Tuesday

 Copyright 2015 Diligent Media Corporation Ltd., DNA (Daily News & Analysis), distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 476 words
Byline: Soumonty Kanungo
Body




                                              US company recalling two drugs manufactured by Agila Onco, which it bought from Strides Arcolab two years back 
Mumbai: US pharma giant Mylan is extending recall of two drugs manufactured at Bengaluru plant of Agila Onco Therapies Ltd.
Mylan had acquired Agila, a sterile injectables business from Strides Arcolab in $1.75 billion deal in 2013.
The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) said Mylan was expanding its nationwide voluntary recall to the hospital/user level of select lots of gemcitabine and methotrexate injection due to the presence of visible foreign particulate matter observed during testing of retention samples.
Mylan, in a press release on FDA website, said it is recalling seven lots of intravenously administered cancer drug gemcitabine injection in different dosages indicated for the treatment of ovarian cancer, breast cancer, non-small cell lung and pancreatic cancer.
"These lots were distributed in the US between January 2014 and February 2015, and were manufactured and packaged by Agila Onco Therapies. Lot 7801084 and 7801110 are packaged with a Pfizer injectable label," it said.
Similarly, methotrexate injection, USP 25 mg/ml has also been recalled. The drug can be administered intramuscularly, intravenously, intra-arterially, or intrathecally and is indicated for certain neoplastic diseases, severe psoriasis and adult rheumatoid arthritis. The lot was distributed in the US between December 8 and 19, 2014.
Mylan in its release said administration of a sterile injectable that has foreign particulates has the potential of severe health consequences.
"Intrathecal administration could result in a life threatening adverse event or result in permanent impairment of a body function. Intravenous administration has the potential to damage and/or obstruct blood vessels which could induce emboli, particularly in the lungs. If a right to left cardiac shunt is present, the particulate may lead to arterial emboli and result in stroke, myocardial infarction, respiratory failure, and loss of renal and hepatic function or tissue necrosis," it said.
The company also said it is notifying its distributors and customers by letter and is arranging for return of all recalled products.
"Distributors, retailers, hospitals, clinics, and physicians that have these products which are being recalled should stop use and return to place of purchase," the release said.
In an earlier recall initiated in April, Mylan recalled one lot of the cancer drug carboplatin with a Mylan label.
The drug is an intravenously administered product indicated for treatment of advanced ovarian carcinoma. The company has also recalled seven lots of cancer drugs with Pfizer labels.
This includes five lots of gemcitabine in different dosages, and one lot each of methotrexate injection and cytarabine injection.
 Load-Date: June 15, 2015

 

End of Document


Another compounder recalls drugs because of lapse in outside testing
FiercePharma
September 6, 2013 Friday

 Copyright 2013 Questex Media Group LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 570 words
Byline: Eric Palmer
Body




A third compounding pharmacy is recalling sterile injectable drugs nationwide because it can't rely on the results of an outside laboratory that tested them for sterility. The recall comes as the FDA is applying more heat to this niche of the drugmaking market despite the lack of its clear authority to do so. The agency filed a warning letter against another compounder this week, but in it acknowledged there are questions about its powers to take action.
Birmingham, AL-based Medaus Pharmacy today said it is is voluntarily recalling 11 products, including lipo injections with lidocaine, because it was unable to confirm testing "was conducted in a manner consistent with the highest standards of excellence we demand from ourselves and on behalf of our patients." The compounder did not name the outside lab.
Two other compounders, Birmingham, AL-based Wellness Pharmacy and JCB Laboratories of Wichita, KS, both recalled 6 lots of products last week because of concerns about testing by Front Range Laboratories of Loveland, CO. Questions about outside lab testing may become more important as the FDA skirmishes with yet another Texas compounding pharmacy that claims the FDA has no real authority to ask it to recall products.
The FDA last month updated a notice to healthcare providers to remind them not to use products produced by NuVision Pharmacy of Dallas, TX. The FDA said questions of sterility were raised during an inspection of the facility. But that compounder is contesting the FDA's authority and findings. In a notice on its own website, NuVision says the FDA is judging compounders using manufacturing standards and that is not a manufacturer. It claims all of its products are sterile, tested by an outside lab, and customers with concerns can have the results of those tests sent to them as proof.
While compounders are traditionally overseen by state authorities, the FDA began conducting inspections of the largest compounding pharmacies following last year's outbreak of fungal meningitis that infected hundreds of people, dozens fatally. The patients fell ill after they were injected with pain drugs from the now defunct New England Compounding Center (           NECC) of Framingham, MA.
  
  This week the agency filed a warning letter against Stewart Compounding Pharmacy in Fayetteville, NC, after inspectors found problems with sterile manufacturing there. But in the letter, the FDA acknowledged, "there are conflicting judicial decisions regarding the applicability" of federal law as it applies to compounding pharmacies. It said it believes it has the authority to enforce certain standards. At the same time, the FDA has been urging Congress to pass legislation that would specifically grant it powers over the largest compounders, limit the drugs they could manufacture and require them to meet certain minimum requirements. In testimony before Congress, FDA Commissioner            Margaret Hamburg has said that the agency's authority is not clear, making it difficult to take actions against compounders.
- here's the recall notice
  - read the Stewart            warning letter
Related Articles: 
Compounding pharmacies: Massachusetts closes 2, FDA fights with 1 in Texas
           Compounders recall drugs after outside tests questioned
           GAO report says FDA needs clear authority over compounders
           Hamburg faces Senate as new compounding regulations progress
           FDA: Infections prompt recall of all Specialty Compounding's sterile meds
 Load-Date: September 8, 2013

 

End of Document


Fla. compounding pharmacy recalls sterile drugs
Associated Press Online
April 21, 2013 Sunday 5:48 PM GMT

 Copyright 2013 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 241 words
Dateline: LAKE MARY Fla.
Body




A Florida-based compounding pharmacy is voluntarily recalling all lots of its sterile non-expired drug products sold nationwide over concerns the products are not sterile and may contain bacteria, Food and Drug Administration officials said Sunday.
The FDA encouraged health care facilities and providers who have received sterile products, including all injectables, from Balanced Solutions Compounding Pharmacy to immediately check their medical supplies, quarantine the products, and follow the company's recall instructions. Patients who were administered any sterile drug products produced and distributed by Balanced Solutions should contact their health care providers.
The recall includes a few dozen sterile products furnished nationwide, according to a statement from the company. The majority of the products were injectable drugs.
An FDA inspection of the company revealed "poor practices and conditions which may have exposed the company's sterile products to microbial contamination," officials said in a statement.
The FDA sampled chromium chloride injections from Balanced Solutions and identified gram-negative bacteria in the product, which can cause disease and many types of infection. But officials said the bacteria do not usually cause infection in humans.
Balanced Solutions is a division of Axium Healthcare Pharmacy Inc., which is based in Lake Mary.
An email and phone call to the company were not immediately returned Sunday.
 Load-Date: April 22, 2013

 

End of Document


Stop taking recalled cholesterol drug, FDA advises
CNN.com
November 29, 2012 Thursday 9:12 AM EST

 Copyright 2012 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved
 
Section: HEALTH
Length: 486 words
Byline: By Elizabeth Cohen and William Hudson, CNN
Body




The Food and Drug Administration advised concerned consumers Thursday to stop taking a popular cholesterol drug that may be contaminated with specks of glass if the pills came from one of 41 recalled lots.
The recall of generic Lipitor was initiated nearly three weeks ago by Ranbaxy Pharmaceuticals, but this is the first time the FDA -- or anyone else -- has told consumers to stop taking the drug.
The FDA also announced Thursday that Ranbaxy would stop making atorvastatin while it investigates how the glass might have gotten into the drug.
Even with these new guidelines, some pharmacies are still telling customers it's safe to take the drug.
"Patients should continue to proceed as they normally would," said Brian Henry, vice president of corporate communications at Express Scripts, on Thursday. He added that the company would not give customers refunds for the generic Lipitor, or atorvastatin.
Cholesterol drug recalled over glass concerns
Henry explained that this was a "pharmacy-level recall," meaning pharmacies must stop dispensing contaminated lots of the drug, but consumers could keep taking what they already had at home -- even though the FDA has confirmed that some of the contaminated drug may have reached consumers.
Pharmacists at several CVS stores also told customers it was OK to keep taking Ranbaxy's atorvastatin but said they would replace the drug at a patient's request.
"This whole thing is confusing for consumers," said Lisa Gill, editor of prescription drugs at Consumer Reports.
She also expressed concern that it took the FDA nearly three weeks to issue guidance to consumers.
"It's not clear why it took them so long," she said. "It's surprising."
FDA spokeswoman Sarah Clark-Lynn declined to comment on the reasons behind the delay.
Recall leaves glass-specked drug in hands of patients
In its statement Thursday, the FDA said that the glass particles were "similar to the size of a grain of sand" and that "the possibility of adverse events related to the recalled product appear to be low."
Making matters potentially even more confusing, the FDA directed concerned consumers to call their pharmacies to see whether their pills had been recalled, as not all lots of the drug are effected.
However, pharmacists say they have no way of figuring out what lot number a bottle of pills came from.
"The ability to tie a specific prescription to a lot number would be very difficult," said Ronna Hauser, vice president of policy and regulatory affairs at the National Community Pharmacists Association.
Ranbaxy, India's largest pharmaceutical company and the 12th largest generics maker in the world, has had quality problems in the past.
The FDA has accused the company of "a pattern of systemic fraudulent conduct," including taking shortcuts in crucial quality tests. So widespread and grave was the misbehavior that in 2008 the FDA barred Ranbaxy from importing 30 drugs into the United States.
 Load-Date: December 1, 2012

 

End of Document


Fla. compounding pharmacy recalls sterile drugs
The Associated Press
April 21, 2013 Sunday 05:48 PM GMT

 Copyright 2013 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 241 words
Dateline: LAKE MARY, Fla. 
Body




A Florida-based compounding pharmacy is voluntarily recalling all lots of its sterile non-expired drug products sold nationwide over concerns the products are not sterile and may contain bacteria, Food and Drug Administration officials said Sunday.
The FDA encouraged health care facilities and providers who have received sterile products, including all injectables, from Balanced Solutions Compounding Pharmacy to immediately check their medical supplies, quarantine the products, and follow the company's recall instructions. Patients who were administered any sterile drug products produced and distributed by Balanced Solutions should contact their health care providers.
The recall includes a few dozen sterile products furnished nationwide, according to a statement from the company. The majority of the products were injectable drugs.
An FDA inspection of the company revealed "poor practices and conditions which may have exposed the company's sterile products to microbial contamination," officials said in a statement.
The FDA sampled chromium chloride injections from Balanced Solutions and identified gram-negative bacteria in the product, which can cause disease and many types of infection. But officials said the bacteria do not usually cause infection in humans.
Balanced Solutions is a division of Axium Healthcare Pharmacy Inc., which is based in Lake Mary.
An email and phone call to the company were not immediately returned Sunday.
 Load-Date: April 22, 2013

 

End of Document


Fla. compounding pharmacy recalls sterile drugs
Associated Press Financial Wire
April 21, 2013 Sunday 5:48 PM GMT

 Copyright 2013 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 241 words
Dateline: LAKE MARY Fla.
Body




A Florida-based compounding pharmacy is voluntarily recalling all lots of its sterile non-expired drug products sold nationwide over concerns the products are not sterile and may contain bacteria, Food and Drug Administration officials said Sunday.
The FDA encouraged health care facilities and providers who have received sterile products, including all injectables, from Balanced Solutions Compounding Pharmacy to immediately check their medical supplies, quarantine the products, and follow the company's recall instructions. Patients who were administered any sterile drug products produced and distributed by Balanced Solutions should contact their health care providers.
The recall includes a few dozen sterile products furnished nationwide, according to a statement from the company. The majority of the products were injectable drugs.
An FDA inspection of the company revealed "poor practices and conditions which may have exposed the company's sterile products to microbial contamination," officials said in a statement.
The FDA sampled chromium chloride injections from Balanced Solutions and identified gram-negative bacteria in the product, which can cause disease and many types of infection. But officials said the bacteria do not usually cause infection in humans.
Balanced Solutions is a division of Axium Healthcare Pharmacy Inc., which is based in Lake Mary.
An email and phone call to the company were not immediately returned Sunday.
 Load-Date: April 22, 2013

 

End of Document


3 versions of diabetes drug metformin recalled
The Straits Times (Singapore)
December 6, 2019 Friday

 Copyright 2019 Singapore Press Holdings Limited All Rights Reserved
Section: HOME
Length: 530 words
Byline: Jean Iau
Body




Three versions of a diabetes medication are being recalled here after they were found to contain unsafe levels of an impurity that could potentially cause cancer.
 The Health Sciences Authority (HSA) tested all 46 locally marketed metformin medicine. Of these, 43 are not affected.
 The HSA said on Wednesday that three metformin drugs were found to contain a type of nitrosamine, N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), in trace amounts that are above the internationally acceptable level.
 NDMAs are classified as potential carcinogens for humans.
 As a precaution, the HSA said it is recalling the three affected drugs, which are used to control high blood sugar levels in diabetic patients.
 The recalled drugs are: one batch of the Glucient XR 500mg tablet, supplied by Glorious Dexa Singapore; and all batches of Meijumet prolonged-release tablet in 750mg and 1,000mg versions, supplied by Pharmazen Medicals.
 The HSA said the risk to patients who have been taking the affected medicine is "very low". This is because the cancer risk of nitrosamines is associated with long-term use of the affected drugs, and the medicine has been supplied here for only a short period of time - since last year.
 Patients taking the affected metformin medicine are advised not to stop treatment on their own, as doing so suddenly will raise blood sugar levels, which may pose a greater health risk than the trace amounts of NDMA.
 The HSA has also advised healthcare professionals to contact their patients who are taking the affected drugs and arrange for an exchange of their medicine as soon as possible.
The Health Sciences Authority said the risk to patients who have been taking the affected medicine is "very low". This is because the cancer risk of nitrosamines is associated with long-term use of the affected drugs, and the medicine has been supplied here for only a short period of time.
 Patients who are concerned about their current treatment should speak to their doctor or pharmacist.
 NDMA can be found in low levels in processed food - including pickled vegetables, salted fish, processed meat products such as bacon and sausages - and in polluted air.
 Worldwide recalls were recently done when NDMA was found to be formed unexpectedly during the manufacture of some medicines, including some heart and gastric drugs.
 The internationally acceptable level of NDMA is 96 nanograms per day. This is the amount deemed reasonably safe if a patient takes the affected medicine every day continuously for a lifetime of 70 years.
 On Wednesday, the United States Food and Drug Administration said that it is testing samples of metformin sold in the US for NDMA and will recommend recalls as appropriate, Bloomberg reported.
 The European Medicines Agency has also asked companies to test for high levels of NDMA in metformin. No dangerous levels have been detected in European Union supplies to date.
 The HSA is working with the companies supplying the affected medicine and international regulatory agencies to verify the causes of the contamination, and identify the measures to address the issue.
 Consumers can contact the HSA on 6866-3538 or e-mail contact_hprg@hsa.gov.sg if they have more questions.
 Load-Date: December 5, 2019

 

End of Document


Fla. compounding pharmacy recalls sterile drugs
The Associated Press State & Local Wire
April 21, 2013 Sunday 5:14 PM GMT

 Copyright 2013 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 241 words
Dateline: LAKE MARY Fla.
Body




A Florida-based compounding pharmacy is voluntarily recalling all lots of its sterile non-expired drug products sold nationwide over concerns the products are not sterile and may contain bacteria, Food and Drug Administration officials said Sunday.
The FDA encouraged health care facilities and providers who have received sterile products, including all injectables, from Balanced Solutions Compounding Pharmacy to immediately check their medical supplies, quarantine the products, and follow the company's recall instructions. Patients who were administered any sterile drug products produced and distributed by Balanced Solutions should contact their health care providers.
The recall includes a few dozen sterile products furnished nationwide, according to a statement from the company. The majority of the products were injectable drugs.
An FDA inspection of the company revealed "poor practices and conditions which may have exposed the company's sterile products to microbial contamination," officials said in a statement.
The FDA sampled chromium chloride injections from Balanced Solutions and identified gram-negative bacteria in the product, which can cause disease and many types of infection. But officials said the bacteria do not usually cause infection in humans.
Balanced Solutions is a division of Axium Healthcare Pharmacy Inc., which is based in Lake Mary.
An email and phone call to the company were not immediately returned Sunday.
 Load-Date: April 22, 2013

 

End of Document


Emcure knocked by the FDA for sterility issues after injectable drug recall
FiercePharma Manufacturing
August 15, 2019

 Copyright 2019 Questex Media Group LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: ARTICLE
Length: 374 words
Byline: Kyle Blankenship
Highlight: Emcure Pharmaceuticals has had its share of run-ins with the FDA in the past over the sterility of its Indian manufacturing plant. Now, it can notch one more black mark on its belt.\r\r
Body




Emcure Pharmaceuticals has had its share of run-ins with the FDA in the past over the sterility of one of its Indian manufacturing plants. Now, it can notch one more black mark on its belt.
The FDA issued Emcure a warning letter earlier this month after investigators said the generic drugmaker did not properly investigate how microbial growth made its way into batches of injectable infection fighter amikacin sulfate and schizophrenia drug prochlorperazine edisylate.
After an inspection in February, investigators said the likely root cause of the failure was a lab error but that Emcure didn't have the correct procedures in place to identify the problem.
“According to your sterility failure investigations, the most probable root cause for both events was laboratory error,” investigators wrote. “Your firm's investigations substantially addressed the potential for microbial contamination during sterility testing, but deemphasized potential manufacturing causes.”
RELATED: Emcure injected schizophrenia drug recalled after contamination detected
In late May, Heritage Pharmaceuticals, which distributes both Emcure drugs in the U.S., issued a voluntary recall of some sublots after microbial growth was found in unreleased supplies of the two products.
The East Brunswick, New Jersey-based distributor warned that patients injected with either of the drugs could get site-specific or even systemic infections that could lead to hospitalization and death.
The FDA provided a laundry list of improvements for Emcure, saying the voluntary recall didn't go far enough to address deficiencies at the drugmaker's Maharasthra, India, plant. Among the changes the FDA requested was a third-party review of Emcure's inspection records and sterility test methods.
Most troubling for Emcure is that the most recent FDA warning letter was not the first time the agency has cited its plant for sterility problems.
In March 2016, the FDA issued another letter to Emcure citing microbial growth in sublots of two of their injectable products and a lack of sterile facilities. In one instance, the investigators said an “operator placed acup on the floor … to collect water from aunit (and) used the cup contents to wet the mechanical assembly in the piston drive.”
 Load-Date: August 19, 2019

 

End of Document


BLOG: MedBeat: LewisGale contacts 45 heart patients about recalled drugs
MedBeat
October 24, 2012 Wednesday 2:17 AM EST

 Copyright 2012 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 276 words
Byline: Sarah Jones
Body




Oct 23, 2012 (MedBeat:http://blogs.roanoke.com/medbeat/ Delivered by Newstex)
 Oct. 23--LewisGale Medical Center notified 45 of its cardiac patients last week that they had received a drug from the Massachusetts specialty pharmacy at the center of the deadly fungal meningitis outbreak.
 All the patients received a "cardioplegia solution" during heart surgery that had been made by New England Compounding Center, said LewisGale spokeswoman Nancy May in an email.
 "While these medications have not currently been confirmed as causing infections and authorities believe the risk is very low, we have notified these patients out of an abundance of caution as advised by U.S. Food and Drug Administration," May said.
 May said patients were contacted by mail and phone.
 The move comes after health investigators said last week that more people may be at risk for infections beyond those who received spine injections for pain. The FDA said [http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm322734.htm] products from New England Compounding may have caused other infections in patients who had eye operations or open-heart surgery. The warning was based in part on two heart transplant patients who got fungal infections, but it is unknown if the company's medication caused the infections, according to the Associated Press [           http://news.yahoo.com/fda-pharmacys-other-drugs-may-causing-illness-190649992.html].
 *
 --Tweet [           https://twitter.com/share]
 --Pin It [           http://pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?url=http://blogs.roanoke.com/medbeat/2012/10/lewisgale-contacts-45-heart-patients-about-recalled-drugs/] [javascript:void(run_pinmarklet())]
 Load-Date: October 23, 2012

 

End of Document


500-plus patients received recalled drug in Va.
The Associated Press State & Local Wire
October 4, 2012 Thursday 10:57 PM GMT

 Copyright 2012 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 238 words
Dateline: RICHMOND Va.
Body




Two outpatient clinics in Virginia have contacted more than 500 people who received a medication that has been linked to rare, potentially deadly form of meningitis, the state epidemiologist said Thursday.
Dr. David Trump said the patients in two southwest Virginia clinics received injections since July of the now-recalled back pain medication. One person has died in Virginia and three were sickened after the injections. The state is not identifying the clinics or the individual who died.
Insight Imaging Roanoke said in statement issued Thursday it was one of the Virginia clinics and was contacting patients to "to be sure any patient experiencing symptoms seeks medical attention."
It said it couldn't give any more information on patients because of privacy rules.
Nationally, at least five people have died and 35 sickened with fungal meningitis that has been linked to steroid shots for back pain.
In Virginia, clinic officials have advised patients who received the injections to consult their physicians for the need to have spinal fluid withdrawn for testing of the drug.
"Over the next several days we expect to get reports about more of those individuals and spend time collecting information and understanding what's going on," Trump said.
The drug was distributed to clinics in southwest Virginia, which the state Department of Health said includes Roanoke, the far southwest corner of the state and north to Lynchburg.
 Load-Date: October 5, 2012

 

End of Document


DRL to continue recall of anti-epilepsy drug from US
The Times of India (TOI)
February 9, 2019 Saturday

 Copyright 2019 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS
Length: 328 words
Body




Hyderabad: Dr Reddy's Laboratories Ltd has announced that its wholly-owned subsidiary, Dr Reddy's Laboratories Inc, is continuing its voluntary nationwide recall of a lot of its anti-epilepsy drug - Levetiracetam in 0.54% Sodium Chloride Injection, 1,500 mg/100 mL (15 mg/mL) - in single-dose infusion bags to the hospital level in the US."The recall, which began in October 2018, was originally initiated due to a product complaint received for mislabeling. The pre-printed text content on the infusion bag (primary container) for the lot indicates product information as Levetiracetam in 0.75% Sodium Chloride Injection (1000mg/100ml). The label on the external foil pouch has the product information as Levetiracetam in 0.54% Sodium Chloride Injection (1500mg/100ml)," the company informed the US drug regulator US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA).The company said in its recall letter that patients who may have been administered the mislabeled product could experience adverse reactions such as somnolence, agitation, aggression, depressed level of consciousness, respiratory depression and coma related to over dosage.However, DRL said that "to date, there have been no reports of adverse events related to this recall" for the batch was distributed in the US between August 14, 2018, and September 5, 2018.The Hyderabad-based pharma player said its US arm has notified the distributors to arrange for return of any recalled product and said "wholesalers, distributors, hospitals and pharmacies with an existing inventory of the lot being recalled, should stop use and distribution and quarantine the product immediately for return/replacement/etc of all recalled products". Wholesalers, distributors and pharmacies that have further distributed the recalled product should notify any accounts or additional locations which may have received the recalled product from them, the company said in its recall letter to USFDA. 
For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com
 Load-Date: February 8, 2019

 

End of Document


Popular heartburn drugs are being recalled over cancer worries
FOX - 4 WDAF (Kansas City, Missouri)
September 27, 2019 Friday

 Copyright 2019 Local TV LLC
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 298 words
Byline: Tribune Media Wire
Body




×
Popular heartburn drugs are being recalled over cancer worries
 Nearly two weeks after a probable carcinogen was detected at low levels in heartburn medications, the over-the-counter drugs are being recalled.
 Drug manufacturer Apotex said Thursday it's voluntarily recalling 75mg and 150mg ranitidine tablets sold at Walgreens, Walmart, and Rite Aid over the possible presence of cancer-causing impurity NDMA.
 USA Today notes the acid-reducing drugs are generic versions of Zantac. The FDA has the complete list of recalled products here. Earlier this week, Novartis-owned Sandoz recalled 30-count, 50-count and 500-count bottles of prescription ranitidine capsules, and overseas, British drugmaker GlaxoSmithKline is recalling ranitidine products in India and Hong Kong (it does not sell versions of the drug in the US). Several countries are taking steps to restrict sales of drugs containing ranitidine , ABC News reports.
 The FDA is testing Zantac and its generic versions, but has not yet asked drugmakers for a recall. And Sanofi, which produces the brand-name Zantac, is not yet making any moves.
 "The FDA reported that the levels of N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) in ranitidine in preliminary tests barely exceed amounts found in common foods," says a Sanofi spokesperson. "We are working closely with the FDA and are conducting our own robust investigations to ensure we continue to meet the highest quality safety and quality standards."
 NDMA and two other cancer-causing substances have also led to widespread recalls of blood pressure and heart medications since last year. Manufacturing flaws were blamed for that, but in this case, experts say it's likely that enzymes in a person's body react with the ranitidine molecule and actually create NDMA. See the FDA's updates here.
 Load-Date: September 28, 2019

 

End of Document


Empty capsules force Aurobindo drug recall; Firm joins long list of Indian pharma companies that have recalled drugs in the US market since January
DNA
November 26, 2014 Wednesday

 Copyright 2014 Diligent Media Corporation Ltd., DNA (Daily News & Analysis), distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 619 words
Byline: Soumonty Kanungo
Body




                                              Firm joins long list of Indian pharma companies that have recalled drugs in the US market since January 
Mumbai: Drug recalls in the US market by Indian pharma companies continue despite an increasing number of domestic companies trying to tackle regulatory challenges with the US drug regulator.
Since January, a number of Indian companies including Sun Pharmaceutical Industries, Ranbaxy Laboratories, Dr. Reddy's Laboratories, Lupin, Glenmark, Wockhardt, Cadila Healthcare have recalled a number of drugs in the US. Hyderabad-based Aurobindo Pharma is the recent addition to the list.
According to the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), Aurobindo's US subsidiary Aurobindo Pharma USA has initiated a voluntarily recall of a batch of gabapentin capsules as some of the capsules were found empty. The drug is used in the treatment of epilepsy and for the management of postherpetic neuralgia (pain after shingles).
In a filing to US FDA, Aurobindo Pharma USA said, "Empty capsules could result in missed dose(s) of gabapentin resulting in adverse health consequences that could range from no effect, short-term reduction in efficacy, short term withdrawal effect, or status epilepticus (long period seizures) that could be life-threatening."
The company, however, said it has not received any reports of adverse events related to this recall, but has received four complaints for empty capsules.
The expiry date of the affected lot is December 2015 and is packaged in 100-count bottles. The product was distributed through Northstar label to retail outlets nationwide. The company received the USFDA approval to manufacture and market the product in October 2011.
"Aurobindo Pharma USA is notifying its distributors and customers by recall letters and is arranging for return of all recalled product. Consumers, distributors, and retailers that have product which is being recalled should stop using, distributing, or dispensing the affected lot and return to place of purchase," a release on the FDA website said.
According to an Aurobindo spokesperson, the recall has been voluntarily initiated and it will not have any financial impact on the company. Meanwhile, the pharma company on Tuesday informed BSE that its board has approved to raise funds through issue of securities up to an amount of $350 million (around Rs 2,166 crore) via follow-on offer, qualified institutions placements, further public offer or private placement or by such other method subject to approval of the shareholders.
In another case, Bangalore based Micro Labs' US subsidiary has also initiated recalls of antidiabetic drug glimepiride and cholesterol-lowering drug simvastatin tablets. In separate updates on FDA website, it said that Micro Labs USA, Inc. has initiated recall of 11,328 bottles of glimepiride tablets, USP 2 mg in 100-count and 500-count bottles. The drug was manufactured in the company's Goa facility and the reason for recall was given as out of specification results during stability testing. The recall (Class II type) was initiated in October 2014.
In another update, Micro Labs recalled 1,008 bottles of simvastatin tablets, USP 10 mg, 90-count bottles due to product failed Impurity content (Butylated Hydroxy Anisole Content) against shelf life specification. The product was manufactured at the Goa facility and the recall (Class III) was initiated in August 2014.
According to a pharma analysts, there is nothing unusual to product recalls. "Even a lot of multinationals do that. But it is important is to see that the frequency of products recall may not be too often and not from the same facility again and again. Otherwise, it could lead to a trigger for FDA."
 Load-Date: November 25, 2014

 

End of Document


Wockhardt recalls some drugs from US market
Dion Global Solutions Limited
April 28, 2015 Tuesday

 Copyright 2015 Dion Global Solutions Limited All Rights Reserved
Length: 255 words
Dateline: India 
Body




India, April 28 -- Pharma & biotech firm Wockhardt Ltd on Tuesday said it would recall some drugs manufactured at its L1- Chikalthana and Waluj in Aurangabad, Maharashtra plants in India before the US FDA banned those sites due to quality concerns.
The FDA banned US exports from Wockhardt's two plants citing manufacturing quality lapses.
The agency conducted an inspection of both plants earlier this year, following which it made some observations regarding batches of some drugs that were made at the plants when they were not banned, Wockhardt said in a statement.
"Several batches of products manufactured prior to the import alerts may still be in the US market," Wockhardt Ltd said in a filing to the Bombay Stock Exchange on April 28, 2015.
As a measure of preparedness and as an abundant precaution, the company has now decided to recall, as a part of remedial measure all the remaining batches in the US market. The company said that, even though there is no evidence of risk to patient safety from the products currently available in the US market.
Additionally, the MHRA, UK has restored the EU GMP certification of the company's potent product facility at Kadaiya, Daman, it added.
Meanwhile, shares of the company were trading at Rs 1,258.05 apiece, down 5.41 per cent, from previous close on BSE at 14:57 hours.
Published by HT Syndication with permission from Dion Global Solutions Limited. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at htsyndication@hindustantimes.com
 Load-Date: April 28, 2015

 

End of Document


European Medicines Agency launches review of recalled heart drug
 
EurActiv.com
August 3, 2018 Friday

 Copyright 2018 Acteurs d'Europe All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 272 words
Byline: Beatriz Rios
Highlight: The European Medicines Agency (EMA) said Thursday it is conducting a review of the health effects on patients of a widely used blood pressure medication recalled around the world last month.
Body




The regulator will analyse the impact of the active ingredient valsartan, produced by Chinese manufacturer Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceutical Company, after warnings of contamination by a cancer-causing impurity.
The company, listed on the Shanghai stock exchange, launched a global recall of the drug on 18 July following warnings by US and European regulators over the presence of N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), which is believed to potentially cause cancer through long-term use.
In a series of pronouncements last month, Huahai said it had moved to suspend supply and had begun the recall.
Valsartan is a generic drug mainly used for the treatment of high blood pressure and congestive heart failure.
NDMA was an unexpected impurity believed to have formed as a side product after Huahai introduced changes to its manufacturing process in 2012, according to the London-based EMA.
It first issued an alert over the drug on July 5, and American regulators followed up with their own warning a week later.
The EMA repeated Thursday that there was "no immediate risk to patients" and they "should not stop taking their medicines without consulting their doctor or pharmacist".
The EMA said its review is being carried out by the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use, which is responsible for probing concerns over patient medicines.
Its opinion will be forwarded to the European Commission, which will issue a final legally binding decision applicable in all countries in the EU.
Huahai's stock has dropped more than 20% since the warnings first emerged in early July.
The company could not be reached for immediate comment on Thursday.
 Load-Date: August 3, 2018

 

End of Document


Recalled, drug-tainted supplements still available for purchase.
Adverse Event Reporting News
November 4, 2014

 Copyright 2014 Gale Group, Inc.
All Rights Reserved
Business and Industry
Copyright 2014 Washington Information Source, Inc.
Section: Pg. 12; Vol. 11; No. 21
Length: 876 words
Highlight: Dietary supplements
Body




A new study found that long after FDA issued recalls for dietary supplements tainted with banned drugs, more than half of the tainted supplements were still available for purchase, Reuters Health reported Oct. 21.
"There's no question that these supplements that contain pharmaceuticals are not allowed to be sold, there are clear cut laws," lead author Pieter Cohen, M.D., told Reuters Health by phone.
FDA does have some loose regulatory power over supplements, which are categorized like a food, Cohen said.
If a food manufacturer's product were tainted with salmonella, the tainted food would be recalled, the factory cleaned and then manufacturing would continue, Cohen said. In the case of supplements, FDA issues recalls for products tainted with dangerous pharmaceuticals, but without proper enforcement the tainted products remain on the market and some companies continue to produce more, he said.
FDA has identified more than 400 supplement brands tainted with pharmaceuticals, and issued a recall for 70% of the products.
Cohen and his coauthors studied 27 of the 274 supplements FDA recalled between 2009 and 2012, two-thirds of which were American-made. They bought the supplements from manufacturer websites at least eight months and up to four years after their FDA recall, then tested their chemical makeup.
The researchers found that 18 of the 27 supplements they purchased still contained a pharmaceutical adulterant, according to results in "JAMA."
The supplements were marketed for sports enhancement, weight loss and sexual enhancement, among other things.
Among the banned substances in the products were sibutramine, a weight loss drug linked to heart attack and stroke, and phenolphthalein, a laxative being removed from many markets due to a potential link to cancer.
"Dietary supplement manufacturers and distributors are legally responsible for marketing a safe product that is not adulterated, and that complies with FDA's good manufacturing practice regulations for dietary supplements," FDA told Reuters Health in a statement.
But, FDA warned, "The supply chain for these products is extremely fragmented; one product manufactured by an unknown company overseas may be sold by dozens of different distributors in the United States. The individuals and businesses selling these products generally are difficult to locate, operate out of residential homes and distribute via Internet, small stores and mail. Products are shipped through the international mail facilities and are often misdeclared as unrelated goods to avoid detection. Even after recall and enforcement action against one major distributor, the product may continue to be widely sold."
Many consumers don't realize how potent these pharmaceuticals are, Cohen said.
"Responsible manufacturers and marketers of dietary supplements applaud strong enforcement measures by FDA to address illegal products that contain undisclosed, active pharmaceutical ingredients," Steve Mister, President and CEO of the Council for Responsible Nutrition in Washington, D.C., a dietary supplement trade association, wrote in a statement. "We have zero tolerance for this problem and welcome not only recalls, but also criminal enforcement against companies that put consumers at risk."
Although the researchers found 27 of the 274 recalled supplements still available online from manufacturers, more may be available in shops or gas stations, where an earlier study showed most people purchase supplements, said Cohen, a professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School in Boston and an internist at the Cambridge Health Alliance.
Also, a supplement manufacturer could easily rename its recalled product and start marketing it again without reformulation, and FDA would have to go back and test the renamed product before issuing another recall, he said.
Although there is a framework in place to regulate supplements, enforcement is lacking, he said.
"There's no consequences to the manufacturer, which is absurd," he said.
Although they aimed to purchase supplements manufactured after FDA recall, some may have been manufactured before it, the authors note.
Some consumers may seek these products out even though they have been recalled, but many are unaware of the recall, Cohen said.
"This is criminal activity," said Daniel Fabricant, former Director of the Division of Dietary Supplement Programs at FDA and current CEO of the Natural Products Assn., another trade association. "There needs to be some really hardcore enforcement."
"Consumers need to understand the risks, if they can't get an erectile dysfunction drug and they go looking for a natural product tainted with pharmaceuticals," he told Reuters Health by phone.
Some of the recalled products have labels in mixed languages, which is also against the law, Fabricant noted.
"Right now my recommendation is for consumers to avoid muscle building supplements, weight loss and sexual enhancement supplements," which are most likely to contain dangerous drugs, Cohen said.
These supplements either do not work or are tainted with pharmaceuticals, he said.
Many vitamin and mineral supplements are safe, especially those sold as single ingredients, he said. Products made up of a "cocktail" of ingredients are more likely to be tainted, he said.
 Load-Date: April 12, 2017

 

End of Document


Drug recalls surge
CNNMoney.com
August 16, 2010 Monday 5:14 PM EST

 Copyright 2010 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved
 
Section: COMPANY NEWS
Length: 797 words
Byline: By Parija Kavilanz, senior writer
Body




Recalls of prescription and over the counter drugs are surging, raising questions about the quality of drug manufacturing in the United States.
The Food and Drug Administration reported more than 1,742 recalls last year, skyrocketing from 426 in 2008, according to the Gold Sheet, a trade publication on drug quality that analyzes FDA data.
One company, drug repackager Advantage Dose, accounted for more than 1,000 of  those recalls. Even excluding Advantage Dose, which has shut down, recalls jumped 50% last year.
"We've seen a trend where the last four years are among the top five for the most number of drug recalls since we began tallying recalls in 1988," said Bowman Cox, managing editor of the Gold Sheet. "That's a meaningful development."
The fast pace of drug recalls seems to be continuing in 2010. Drug recalls totaled 296 from January through June of this year, said Cox. "If we continue at this same rate, we could get 600 or more recalls by the end of the year," he said. "That's still a very high rate of recalls."
High-profile recalls of Tylenol and other products by McNeil Consumer Healthcare, a unit of Johnson & Johnson, have drawn attention to quality concerns in manufacturing.
The mounting problems over recalls have also drawn attention from lawmakers. Two bills introduced this year would impose stricter regulations on the industry and give the FDA authority to mandate recalls.
The spike in recalls, especially of generic and over-the-counter drugs, is being driven by manufacturing lapses, experts say. Some of the biggest culprits: the quality of raw materials, faulty labeling and packaging and contamination.
Increased FDA scrutiny of drug production facilities may also be triggering recalls.
For its part, the FDA maintains that it hasn't identified any alarming patterns in last year's recalls.
An FDA official told the Gold Sheet that 2009 saw no increase in recall "incidents" -- or recalls involving one product problem at a company -- just more recalls per incident.
"Since every recall situation is unique, it would be difficult to assess whether there are any trends or increases in recalls this year," FDA spokeswoman Elaine Gansz Bobo told CNNMoney. "At this time, however, we have not identified any trends."
Cause for concern
A number of factors are fueling the recall surge. The stampede by drugmakers to be first to bring generic versions to market, after drugs lose patent protection, is one of them.
"The first applicant typically gets the lion's share of the business for the new drug," said Cox.
Generic drugs account for about three quarters of all prescription drug sales, according to industry group PhRMA.
In their hurry, drugmakers sometimes fail to spend enough time time learning how best to make the drug.
For example, Detroit-based Caraco Pharmaceutical Laboratories issued four "tablet-thickness" recalls on March 31, 2009, an additional one on June 8 and yet another recall on April 17 for products that might have been contaminated, said Cox.
"So they get the application. They make and market the drug, but they could still have problems down the road if they haven't really understood the optimum way to make that drug," said Cox.
Caraco could not be reached for comment.
Drugmakers aren't the only ones that have run into problems. Repackagers that relabel drugs into smaller units for resale or distribution to health care facilities, have also had serious lapses.
Advantage Dose, which led last year's recalls by far, is one such company. It issued 1,106 recalls last year following the FDA's inspection of its facility in late 2008. According to the Gold Sheet report, the FDA's inspection listed a wide range of manufacturing problems.
Cost pressures
Another reason for the recalls: Cost cutting that goes too close to the bone.
Drugmakers, facing intense competition, are trimming manufacturing investment or outsourcing production, said Prabir Basu, executive director of the National Institute for Pharmaceutical Technology and Education, a nonprofit scientific and research organization.
"It is very expensive to make drugs. It also costs a lot of money to maintain adequate quality controls," Basu said. "You have to invest a lot."
And since generic and over the counter drugs aren't as lucrative for drugmakers as prescription drugs, companies may not be investing enough  resources to make high-quality, safe products.
"We still have the best at drug manufacturing here in the United States. But if we're seeing signs of trouble, imagine what's happening outside of the U.S. in other countries from where we import drugs," said Basu.
The Gold Sheet report said that 165 recalls last year were of products made, or believed to be made, abroad. That was up 58% from 2008.
"Overall, I am concerned about the quality of drugs," said Basu.
 Load-Date: October 20, 2010

 

End of Document


Counter drug recall
The Sunday Times (Australia)
July 11, 2010 Sunday
1 Edition

 Copyright 2010 Nationwide News Pty Limited All Rights Reserved
Section: LOCAL; Pg. 4
Length: 287 words
Byline: Riteshni Singh
Body




MCNEIL Consumer Healthcare has recalled its 21 over-the-counter medicines which were also distributed in Fiji.
In a statement, McNeil Healthcare said the recalled products were currently being sold in the United States, Fiji, Guatemala, Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico, Trinidad & Tobago, and Jamaica.
The drugs being recalled included Benadryl, Children's Tylenol, Motrin IB, Tylenol Extra strength, Tylenol Day and Night and Tylenol PM.
The company announced the latest recall on Thursday and said it was a follow-up to a product recall that McNeil Consumer Healthcare originally announced on January 15.
The recall on January 15 was initiated following consumer complaints of a musty or mouldy odour, which has been linked to the presence of trace amounts of a chemical called 2,4,6-tribromoanisole (TBA).
"The risk of serious adverse medical events is remote. This recall is being conducted with the knowledge of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)," the company said in a statement.
According to McNeil Healthcare the current lot was being added to the list of recalled products as a precautionary measure after a continuing internal review determined that some packaging materials used in the lots had been shipped and stored on the same type of wooden pallet that was tied to the presence of TBA in earlier recalled lots.
"All lots involved in the recall were produced before the January 15, 2010 recall, after which McNeil stopped accepting shipments of materials from its suppliers on that type of pallet."
McNeil Healthcare said consumers who purchased product from the lots included in this recall should stop using the product and contact McNeil Consumer Healthcare for instructions on a refund or replacement.
 Load-Date: July 14, 2010

 

End of Document


Hypertension drugs recalled in many countries still being sold in Nepal
My Republica
January 14, 2019 Monday

 Copyright 2019 Nepal Republic Media Pvt. Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Length: 924 words
Dateline: KATHMANDU 
Body




KATHMANDU, Jan. 14 -- While several Valsartan drugs used by hypertension (high blood pressure) and heart patients have already been recalled in various countries including the US because of some impurities in the key ingredient, they are still being sold in Nepal and the authorities say they are unaware of the impurities.
The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has classified some Valsartan medicines as "probably human carcinogen'' after those medicines were found containing the chemical N-nitrosodiethylamine (NDMA), which can cause cancer in humans.
Nepali drugs regulator, Department of Drug Administration (DDA), however, said it does not have any information on the quality of Valsartan medicines in the Nepali market nor has it taken any initiative to study the impurities.
Even several months since an international ban, Valsartan medicines are still being produced and sold by Nepali pharmaceutical companies.
"Some Valsartan tablets are available in our market," Santosh KC, senior drugs administrator at the DDA, told Republica. "But we are unaware about the medicines recalled in other countries."
On December 31, 2018 Aurobindo Pharma USA Inc announced to recall 80 lots of its Amlodipine Valsartan, Valsartan HCTZ, and Valsartan tablets from the market. In the third week of December, Teva Pharmaceuticals announced to voluntarily recall two blood pressure drugs, Amlodipine/Valsartan combination tablets and Amlodipine/Valsartan/Hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ) tablets, due to an impurity.
In July, 2018 the Ministry of Public Health in Doha recalled seven drug products containing ingredient Valsartan that was manufactured by Chinese company Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceutical L T being sold in the Arabian countries, on suspicion of containing carcinogen.
The list of recalled products includes Cinfaval and Co-cinfaval manufactured by Spanish Cinfa Laboratories, as well as Diostar and Diostar plus manufactured by Jordan's Pharma International Co in addition to Anginet and Co-Anginet produced by the Jordanian United Pharmaceuticals Manufacturing Co and Valzaar manufactured by the Indian Torrent Pharmaceuticals.
Valzaar manufactured by the Indian Torrent Pharmaceuticals is registered with the DDA and is distributed by Pharmachem Pvt Ltd in Nepal, according to the DDA records. "It is available in the market and still being sold," said KC.
According to the DDA, 99 products of Amlodipine Valsartan, including 63 domestic and others mostly Indian, are registered with the DDA. Similarly, 23 items of Valsartan HCTZ including 21 domestic and two Indian are registered with the DDA.
More than a dozen domestic manufacturers including Nepal Pharmaceutical Lab (NPL), Quest, Lomus, Omnica, Sumi, Elite and National produce a variety of medicines for hypertension in Nepal. However, DDA officials refused to disclose the names of manufacturers producing Valsartan tablets.
"We don't have a system to examine the impurity nor the manufacturers have reported to us anything about the quality of such drugs," said KC.
"The Drug Act 2035 BS does not elaborate on such matters. We drafted a new amendment to the Act and submitted it to the Ministry of Health and Population about a year ago but it has yet to be forwarded to the parliament," KC said. "We will study the case and begin the process to recall impure medicines from the market," he said, adding that the importers as well as domestic manufacturers should also act responsibly as the issue is serious.
The DDA informed that 51 domestic manufacturers have been producing a variety of medicines including some for heart-related problems. According to the Association of Pharmaceuticals Producers of Nepal (APPON), 60 percent of the drugs needed in Nepal is supplied by domestic producers.
"Our products are of good quality while many Valsartan products from India have been recalled for impurity," claimed Dipak Dahal, president of the APPON, while also admitting that the raw materials for Nepal are imported from India and China.
Dahal also admitted that the quality of domestic products is not examined in the government labs. "What can we do when even the DDA does nothing?" he said.
Renowned cardiologist Dr Bhagawan Koirala said that the DDA should examine the quality of raw materials being used by Nepali pharma companies and find out where they are imported from. "The matter related to impurities should be checked and regulated by the DDA," said Dr Koirala, adding that a few Valsartan products were recalled in the international market.
He, however, argued that despite the recalls, patients need not be frightened. "The patients should not stop taking their medicines as stopping medicines abruptly will be more harmful and their condition can turn critical," he said, suggesting to doctors and patients to use alternative medicines of Valsartan.
Alternative medicine could be another Valsartan product or a different medication from the same class of drugs, known as angiotensin receptor blockers including losartan, olmesartan, irbesartan, and others, according to the FDA.
The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) says NDMA impurity, which was formerly used in the production of rocket fuel, antioxidants, and lubricant additives, forms during both industrial and natural processes. According to the EPA, exposure to high levels of NDMA may also cause liver damage in people.
Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Republica. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
 Load-Date: January 14, 2019

 

End of Document


B.C. man recalls heavy drug use before pregnant girlfriend found dead; Man recalls drug use before girlfriend found dead
Canadian Press
October 5, 2015 Monday 03:52 PM EST

 Copyright 2015 The Canadian Press All Rights Reserved
 
Section: PRAIRIES/BC
Length: 331 words
Byline: Cam Fortems, Kamloops This Week, The Canadian Press
Body




KAMLOOPS, B.C. - A man accused of murdering his pregnant girlfriend says the week leading up to her death was a blur of using crystal meth, cocaine, heroin and marijuana.
Damien Taylor, now 24, told B.C. Supreme Court that an associate brought him and 16-year-old CJ Fowler to Kamloops from Terrace to sell drugs.
Taylor said the associate bought their tickets on a Greyhound bus. 
"Me and CJ did lines in the back of the bus and I sold coke to someone on the bus," Taylor testified Monday.
He is accused of second-degree murder in the death of Fowler on Dec. 5, 2012.
Taylor said the pair also smoked crystal meth en route and once they were Kamloops. He said he was loaded up with crystal meth and was told to sell it downtown.
The drug-taking continued at Royal Inland Hospital, Taylor said, adding he was so high he got stuck in a washroom.
An emergency room doctor has testified that Taylor was with Fowler when she came to the hospital in the early hours of Dec. 5, 2012, complaining of chest pain from crystal meth use for the second day in a row. 
Dr. Lykke Williamson told court that a routine pregnancy test before X-rays are taken showed Fowler was pregnant and that both she and Taylor seemed calm when he delivered the news.
The trial has already heard from Fowler's stepfather, who said he bought the couple Greyhound bus tickets to Terrace.
Dog walkers found Fowler's body near a creek a few hours after she'd left the hospital. A concrete block was on her chest, and her skull and jaw were smashed.
RCMP in Prince George interviewed Taylor as a witness, and court has heard police found a ripped-up Greyhound bus ticket in the toilet of a hotel where he'd stayed.
Mounties also seized a pair of socks in the garbage, with Fowler's blood on them, and the SD card from her cell phone in his backpack.
Taylor was charged a year later.
Defence lawyer Don Campbell told the 11-person jury that he intends to call a toxicologist who will testify to the effect of drugs. (Kamloops This Week)
 Load-Date: October 8, 2015

 

End of Document


Compounding pharmacy recalls eye drugs and more
USA TODAY
March 22, 2013 Friday
FINAL EDITION

 Copyright 2013 Gannett Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. 2A
Length: 362 words
Byline: Liz Szabo, @LizSzabo, USA TODAY
Body




A Georgia compounding pharmacy on Thursday recalled all of its sterile products because of Food and Drug Administration concerns about safety.
This is the second compounding pharmacy to recall products this week. Compounding pharmacies have been in the spotlight since September, after a nationwide outbreak of fungal meningitis caused by contaminated steroid injections distributed by the Massachusetts-based New England Compounding Center.
The newest recall comes from Clinical Specialties Compounding Pharmacy of Augusta, Ga., which on Monday recalled shipments of the drug Avastin, used to treat macular degeneration, a common cause of age-related blindness. Five patients have reported serious eye infections linked to vials of Avastin, which the pharmacy had repackaged into single-use syringes, from manufactured vials labeled as sterile. On Thursday, the company expanded that recall to include all of its sterile products, not just Avastin.
On Monday, New Jersey-based Med Prep Consulting recalled all products compounded at its facility after mold was found in bags of magnesium sulfate.
Critics of the compounding industry say they aren't surprised by the continued recalls.
Michael Carome, a physician and deputy director of Public Citizen's Health Research Group, says compounding pharmacies  have expanded beyond their traditional role of mixing prescriptions for individual patients to become, in many cases, large-scale manufacturers.
Carome says the recalls stem from "at least a decade of inadequate enforcement by the FDA."
The recalled products from the Georgia pharmacy were distributed between Oct. 19, 2012, and March 19, 2013. FDA officials say doctors should stop using all sterile products from this company until further notice.
The eye infections, called endophthalmitis,  can lead to permanent loss of sight.
"A compromised sterile product puts patients at risk for serious infections," said  Janet Woodcock,  director of the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, in a statement. "Health care professionals should ensure that any medicines they administer to patients are obtained from appropriate, reliable sources and are properly administered." 
 Graphic



 
photo AP Infections were linked to Avastin.
 Load-Date: March 22, 2013

 

End of Document


Bedford Recalls Overdose Drug After Discovered Glass Particles
Washington Drug Letter
February 13, 2012 Monday

 Copyright 2012 Washington Business Information, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: Vol. 44; No. 7
Length: 275 words
Body




Ben Venue subsidiary Bedford Laboratories is voluntarily recalling one lot of its overdose drug acetylcysteine solution USP after finding a single glass particle in a 30 mL vial, the FDA says.
The root cause of the particle is "an issue" on a manufacturing line that caused glass breakage during processing, Ben Venue spokesman Jason Kurtz told WDL. Kurtz said the issue has been corrected but declined to discuss it in detail.
Bedford is conducting the targeted recall of the drug, typically inhaled through a nebulizer, for safety concerns. However, the Ohio-based company said there have been no complaints or adverse event reports attributable to glass particulates in vials of the affected lot.
Acetylcysteine is indicated as adjunct therapy for patients with abnormal mucous secretion following an overdose of acetaminophen.
The recall is the latest in a string of market corrections bedeviling the Ben Venue subsidiary and comes amid ongoing efforts to correct manufacturing problems at its beleaguered Bedford, Ohio, plant. Production at the plant was temporarily halted in November for retooling, but some manufacturing is expected to resume during the first quarter of 2012.
The recall also reflects a persistent industry-wide problem: glass fragments and the potential for formation of glass lamellae in drugs filled in small-volume glass vials.
Earlier this month, Teva subsidiary Cephalon recalled some of its cancer drug Treanda after finding glass particles in a single vial (WDL, Feb. 6). And Amgen, Sandoz, Cumberland Pharmaceuticals and American Regent all had recent glass-related recalls. -- Johnathan Rickman
Release date: Feb. 13, 2012
 Load-Date: February 15, 2012

 

End of Document


Drug recalls raise questions for blood pressure control; The People's Pharmacy: Drug recalls lead to poor blood pressure control
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
March 25, 2019 Monday
2 Edition

 Copyright 2019 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: HEALTH; Pg. 2D
Length: 589 words
Byline: JOE GRAEDON AND TERESA GRAEDON Special correspondents
Body




The People's Pharmacy
QUESTION: I am very concerned about all the recalls of blood pressure pills. When valsartan was first recalled, my doctor put me on losartan. Before long, that was also recalled. In the meantime, my blood pressure was not well-controlled.
 I'm back on valsartan now, but I have no confidence that it is safe to take. I can't afford the brand name, Diovan, because it is so expensive. I guess I have an unacceptable choice: Do I die from cancer or from a heart attack or stroke?
 ANSWER: Since July, millions of blood pressure pills have been recalled because of nitrosamine impurities. The drugs include irbesartan, losartan and valsartan.
 According to the Food and Drug Administration, the risk of cancer is very low, even though the recalled medicines have been contaminated with suspected carcinogens for four years or longer. That said, most people would prefer to avoid potential cancer-causing chemicals in their medicines.
 A perspective published in the New England Journal of Medicine (March 13, 2019) points out that doctors may find it challenging to switch patients from one medication, such as valsartan, to another, such as losartan. There aren't good studies to guide them on how to adjust the dosages.
 The average retail price for a month's supply of brand name Diovan (160 milligrams) is $320, according to GoodRx.com. That organization offers coupons that can lower the price to $260.
 Canadian online pharmacies offer Diovan at around $45 for a four-week supply. There have been no reports of contamination with this brand.
 QUESTION: I have been hearing about the importance of intestinal microbiota for our health. How do drugs such as Nexium affect these microbes that live in our digestive tracts over the long term?
 ANSWER: Investigators have found that acid-suppressing drugs, such as esomeprazole (Nexium), can alter the balance of bacteria in our digestive tracts (Journal of Clinical Biochemistry and Nutrition, January 2018). Such changes may predispose people taking these PPI medications (including lansoprazole, omeprazole and others) to intestinal infections with C. difficile. Some researchers think that "the effects of PPI are more prominent than the effects of antibiotics or other commonly used drugs" (Gut, May 2016).
 QUESTION: My wife has Sjogren's syndrome and some other autoimmune problems. She is taking Plaquenil, which worries us because it can cause serious vision problems.
 I found a reference to using low-dose naltrexone as an alternative treatment with few side effects. Can you comment on the efficacy of this drug for autoimmune problems? I didn't find any solid studies, just anecdotal information.
 ANSWER: Naltrexone is an oral form of the opioid antagonist naloxone. At the standard 50 milligram dose, it is approved for treating alcoholism and other substance abuse disorders.
 Off-label, low-dose naltrexone (1 to 4.5 milligrams) is being considered for use against chronic pain (Senior Care Pharmacist, Jan. 1, 2019), fibromyalgia (Current Rheumatology Reviews, 2018) and certain autoimmune conditions (International Immunopharmacology, August 2018).
 We haven't found any studies of low-dose naltrexone for Sjogren's syndrome, which causes dry mouth, dry eyes and complications affecting other organs. Researchers need to conduct well-controlled trials to determine if this drug would be helpful.
 In their column, Joe and Teresa Graedon answer letters from readers. You can email them via their website: www.PeoplesPharmacy.com.© 2019 King Features Syndicate Inc.
 Load-Date: March 25, 2019

 

End of Document


ANOTHER batch of blood pressure drugs recalled over traces of cancer-causing chemical used in ROCKET FUEL
MailOnline
January 23, 2019 Wednesday 2:35 PM GMT

 Copyright 2019 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved
 
Section: HEALTH; Version:1
Length: 493 words
Byline: Mia De Graaf Health Editor For Dailymail.com
Body




•	Last summer, it emerged valsartan produced in China was contaminated with a carcinogen called NDEA, prompting a global recall
•	Months later, drugs are still being recalled for the same reason
•	Earlier this month, European regulators recalled Irbesartan over NDEA fears
•	On Monday, a US company followed suit
•	More than two-thirds of all active drug ingredients originate in China and India
A US company has recalled blood pressure drugs over fears they contain a carcinogen used in rocket fuel - three weeks after European regulators pulled the same drug for the exact same reason. 
Irbesartan is the latest of many China- and India-made drugs being pulled from US and EU markets in recent months after inspectors became aware of contamination issues in top manufacturing plants. 
The primary concern is the presence of a carcinogen called NDEA 
On Monday, Prinston Pharmaceutical Inc announced it was pulled one lot of Irbesartan and seven lots of Irbesartan HCTZ tablets after detecting higher levels of NDEA than the FDA permits. 
The blood pressure recall saga started last summer when it emerged that China-made valsartan - originally developed by Novartis but now off patent - had been contaminated with NDEA, prompting a global recall. 
In October, the FDA started taking action, halting imports of drug ingredients or medicines containing ingredients produced at Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceuticals, a Chinese factory which bulk manufactures valsartan. 
That prompted Mylan NV to announced that it would recall all lots of its blood pressure medicines containing valsartan. 
As the ordeal dragged on, attention became laser-focused on China's drug-making.
Then, on January 3, US regulators revealed the issue was bigger than previously thought: an Indian generic drugmaker, Aurobindo Pharma Ltd, would be recalling 80 lots of medicines containing the blood pressure drug for the same reason. 
The latest piece of the puzzle is the US recall of Irbesartan, used by millions of Americans for hypertension. 
On Monday, Prinston Pharmaceutical Inc said they had not received reports of illness or reactions but the global situation drove them to pull the drug. 
'Patients who are on Irbesartan should continue taking their medication until their pharmacist provides a replacement, or their doctor prescribes a different medication that treats the same condition as the risk of harm to a patient's health may be higher if the treatment is stopped immediately without any alternative,' they said in a press release. 
Experts say this one case is unlocking a Pandora's Box of imperfections and flaws in the way we manufacture, distribute and screen drugs. 
Guido Rasi, the European Medicines Agency's Executive Director, said: 'We need to think globally and work strategically with partners from around the world to make best use of our inspection capacity, so that patients can rely on the quality, safety and efficacy of all medicines, no matter where they have been manufactured.'
 Load-Date: January 23, 2019

 

End of Document


Drug recalls raise questions for blood pressure control; The People's Pharmacy: Drug recalls lead to poor blood pressure control
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
March 25, 2019 Monday
2 Edition

 Copyright 2019 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: HEALTH; Pg. 2D
Length: 589 words
Byline: JOE GRAEDON AND TERESA GRAEDON Special correspondents
Body




The People's Pharmacy
QUESTION: I am very concerned about all the recalls of blood pressure pills. When valsartan was first recalled, my doctor put me on losartan. Before long, that was also recalled. In the meantime, my blood pressure was not well-controlled.
 I'm back on valsartan now, but I have no confidence that it is safe to take. I can't afford the brand name, Diovan, because it is so expensive. I guess I have an unacceptable choice: Do I die from cancer or from a heart attack or stroke?
 ANSWER: Since July, millions of blood pressure pills have been recalled because of nitrosamine impurities. The drugs include irbesartan, losartan and valsartan.
 According to the Food and Drug Administration, the risk of cancer is very low, even though the recalled medicines have been contaminated with suspected carcinogens for four years or longer. That said, most people would prefer to avoid potential cancer-causing chemicals in their medicines.
 A perspective published in the New England Journal of Medicine (March 13, 2019) points out that doctors may find it challenging to switch patients from one medication, such as valsartan, to another, such as losartan. There aren't good studies to guide them on how to adjust the dosages.
 The average retail price for a month's supply of brand name Diovan (160 milligrams) is $320, according to GoodRx.com. That organization offers coupons that can lower the price to $260.
 Canadian online pharmacies offer Diovan at around $45 for a four-week supply. There have been no reports of contamination with this brand.
 QUESTION: I have been hearing about the importance of intestinal microbiota for our health. How do drugs such as Nexium affect these microbes that live in our digestive tracts over the long term?
 ANSWER: Investigators have found that acid-suppressing drugs, such as esomeprazole (Nexium), can alter the balance of bacteria in our digestive tracts (Journal of Clinical Biochemistry and Nutrition, January 2018). Such changes may predispose people taking these PPI medications (including lansoprazole, omeprazole and others) to intestinal infections with C. difficile. Some researchers think that "the effects of PPI are more prominent than the effects of antibiotics or other commonly used drugs" (Gut, May 2016).
 QUESTION: My wife has Sjogren's syndrome and some other autoimmune problems. She is taking Plaquenil, which worries us because it can cause serious vision problems.
 I found a reference to using low-dose naltrexone as an alternative treatment with few side effects. Can you comment on the efficacy of this drug for autoimmune problems? I didn't find any solid studies, just anecdotal information.
 ANSWER: Naltrexone is an oral form of the opioid antagonist naloxone. At the standard 50 milligram dose, it is approved for treating alcoholism and other substance abuse disorders.
 Off-label, low-dose naltrexone (1 to 4.5 milligrams) is being considered for use against chronic pain (Senior Care Pharmacist, Jan. 1, 2019), fibromyalgia (Current Rheumatology Reviews, 2018) and certain autoimmune conditions (International Immunopharmacology, August 2018).
 We haven't found any studies of low-dose naltrexone for Sjogren's syndrome, which causes dry mouth, dry eyes and complications affecting other organs. Researchers need to conduct well-controlled trials to determine if this drug would be helpful.
 In their column, Joe and Teresa Graedon answer letters from readers. You can email them via their website: www.PeoplesPharmacy.com.© 2019 King Features Syndicate Inc.
 Load-Date: March 25, 2019

 

End of Document


Sandoz Recalls Bottles Of Prescription Drugs Over Children's Safety
dpa-AFX International ProFeed
August 30, 2019 Friday 11:16 AM GMT

 Copyright 2019 dpa-AFX Wirtschaftsnachrichten GmbH All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 279 words
Body




       BASEL (dpa-AFX) - Drug maker Sandoz, a Novartis division, recalled about 636,000 bottles of prescription medications Losartan Potassium and Ezetimibe, citing failure of child-resistant cap.  The recall involves certain lot numbers of the drug, which were sold in clinics and pharmacies nationwide as a prescribed medicine from July 2018 through August 2019.  The recalled bottles have 'Sandoz,' the name of the medication, dosage, and National Drug Code or NDC on the front of the bottle labels. The lot number and expiration date are given on the side of the bottle labels.  According to the company, the prescription drug packaging is not child resistant as required by the Poison Prevention Packaging Act. The drug holds the risk of poisoning if swallowed by children.  Sandoz urged consumers to immediately secure the medications and contact the firm for a free replacement child resistant bottle cap.   In June, Lupin Pharmaceuticals had recalled more than 18,000 bottles of an antiboitic drug used to treat bacterial infections. The company said it received a complaint of metal piece identified in the product bottle prior to the reconstitution.  Many products were recalled recently citing children's safety. Last week, Piping Rock Health Products recalled about 18,600 units of wintergreen essential oil due to poisoning risk for children if they ingest it. In July, San Diego-based Majestic Pure Cosmeceuticals had recalled 11,580 units of wintergreen Oil due to a risk of poisoning for young children.  Contigo recalled 5.7 million kids water bottles in U.S. due to a risk of choking. SAMpark LLC recalled children's pajama sets for burn injury risk.      
 Load-Date: August 30, 2019

 

End of Document


Sagent announces drug recall
Chicago Daily Herald
June 15, 2016 Wednesday

 Copyright 2016 Paddock Publications, Inc.
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 1
Length: 586 words
Body




Sagent announces drug recall
SCHAUMBURG — Sagent Pharmaceuticals announced the voluntary nationwide recall of one lot of Oxacillin for Injection, manufactured by Astral SteriTech Private Limited and distributed by Sagent. The company initiated the recall after receiving two product complaints for small, dark particulate matter found in solution after reconstitution. The presence of particulate matter during administration has the potential to cause adverse health consequences in general patient populations. Sagent is not aware of any known adverse patient events resulting from the use of the subject product lot. The lot number being recalled is Lot OXT515, which was distributed to hospitals, wholesalers and distributors nationwide from November 2015 through December 2015. Oxacillin for Injection, USP, 10g is used in the treatment of infections caused by penicillinase producing staphylococci that have demonstrated susceptibility to the drug. It is available by prescription only. Consumers should contact their physician or health care provider if they have experienced any problems that may be related to taking or using the product. Other information regarding the recall is available at www.Sagentpharma.com.
IDS names board member
PLAINFIELD — Infutor Data Solutions has appointed Mike Sullivan to its corporate advisory board. He will act as a senior adviser for finance, human resources, and corporate strategy. Sullivan has over 30 years' experience as a financial and operations executive with a strong information-technology background. He has held executive finance roles at technology firms Lotame, TARGUSinfo (Neustar), NexTone Communications, Viaken Systems, and E-centives, leading key financial and corporate strategy initiatives. Sullivan is a graduate of Dartmouth College and holds a Master's in Business Administration from Stanford University. "Mike is a proven and respected leader in Finance with deep knowledge and understanding of the information services industry. His insights and expertise will bring tremendous value to our entire team as we continue to grow and expand our business," said Infutor President and CEO Gary Walter.
Three suburban properties sold
CHICAGO — Redwood Capital Group, a Chicago-based multifamily investment firm, recently sold three suburban apartment complexes as part of eight transactions conducted during the first quarter of 2016 with a total value of $404.8 million. In addition to the three sales, Redwood sold two more properties and acquired three properties nationwide. One property was recapitalized with a new equity partner, resulting in both a disposition and an acquisition for Redwood. Individual terms of the transactions were not announced. The local sales include Woodlands of Crest Hill, a 730-unit apartment property at 1615 Arbor Lane in Crest Hill, Fountains at Stone Crest, a 400-unit apartment property at 1 Fountainhead Drive in Westmont, and Lakes at Fountain Square, a 384-unit property at 500 Lakehurst Road in Waukegan. The Redwood team overseeing the transactions included Tammy Kelly, senior vice president, asset management, and Courtney Crowder, senior associate. Redwood was represented in all three transactions by the HFF team of Sean P. Fogarty, managing director and Marty F. O'Connell, managing director. Properties in Colorado and North Carolina were also sold. The company acquired two properties in Minnesota, A property in Largo, Fla. was acquired in a joint venture between Redwood and an institutional investor.
 Load-Date: June 15, 2016

 

End of Document


Drug recalls raise questions for blood pressure control; The People's Pharmacy: Drug recalls lead to poor blood pressure control
Richmond Times Dispatch (Virginia)
March 25, 2019 Monday
2 Edition

 Copyright 2019 Richmond Newspapers, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: HEALTH; Pg. 2D
Length: 589 words
Byline: JOE GRAEDON AND TERESA GRAEDON Special correspondents
Body




The People's Pharmacy
QUESTION: I am very concerned about all the recalls of blood pressure pills. When valsartan was first recalled, my doctor put me on losartan. Before long, that was also recalled. In the meantime, my blood pressure was not well-controlled.
 I'm back on valsartan now, but I have no confidence that it is safe to take. I can't afford the brand name, Diovan, because it is so expensive. I guess I have an unacceptable choice: Do I die from cancer or from a heart attack or stroke?
 ANSWER: Since July, millions of blood pressure pills have been recalled because of nitrosamine impurities. The drugs include irbesartan, losartan and valsartan.
 According to the Food and Drug Administration, the risk of cancer is very low, even though the recalled medicines have been contaminated with suspected carcinogens for four years or longer. That said, most people would prefer to avoid potential cancer-causing chemicals in their medicines.
 A perspective published in the New England Journal of Medicine (March 13, 2019) points out that doctors may find it challenging to switch patients from one medication, such as valsartan, to another, such as losartan. There aren't good studies to guide them on how to adjust the dosages.
 The average retail price for a month's supply of brand name Diovan (160 milligrams) is $320, according to GoodRx.com. That organization offers coupons that can lower the price to $260.
 Canadian online pharmacies offer Diovan at around $45 for a four-week supply. There have been no reports of contamination with this brand.
 QUESTION: I have been hearing about the importance of intestinal microbiota for our health. How do drugs such as Nexium affect these microbes that live in our digestive tracts over the long term?
 ANSWER: Investigators have found that acid-suppressing drugs, such as esomeprazole (Nexium), can alter the balance of bacteria in our digestive tracts (Journal of Clinical Biochemistry and Nutrition, January 2018). Such changes may predispose people taking these PPI medications (including lansoprazole, omeprazole and others) to intestinal infections with C. difficile. Some researchers think that "the effects of PPI are more prominent than the effects of antibiotics or other commonly used drugs" (Gut, May 2016).
 QUESTION: My wife has Sjogren's syndrome and some other autoimmune problems. She is taking Plaquenil, which worries us because it can cause serious vision problems.
 I found a reference to using low-dose naltrexone as an alternative treatment with few side effects. Can you comment on the efficacy of this drug for autoimmune problems? I didn't find any solid studies, just anecdotal information.
 ANSWER: Naltrexone is an oral form of the opioid antagonist naloxone. At the standard 50 milligram dose, it is approved for treating alcoholism and other substance abuse disorders.
 Off-label, low-dose naltrexone (1 to 4.5 milligrams) is being considered for use against chronic pain (Senior Care Pharmacist, Jan. 1, 2019), fibromyalgia (Current Rheumatology Reviews, 2018) and certain autoimmune conditions (International Immunopharmacology, August 2018).
 We haven't found any studies of low-dose naltrexone for Sjogren's syndrome, which causes dry mouth, dry eyes and complications affecting other organs. Researchers need to conduct well-controlled trials to determine if this drug would be helpful.
 In their column, Joe and Teresa Graedon answer letters from readers. You can email them via their website: www.PeoplesPharmacy.com.© 2019 King Features Syndicate Inc.
 Load-Date: March 25, 2019

 

End of Document


GIVE FDA MUSCLE TO RECALL BAD DRUGS
St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
July 7, 2010 Wednesday
4 State / Suncoast Edition

 Copyright  2010 Times Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL; Pg. 8A; TIMES EDITORIALS
Length: 431 words
Body




Any day now, federal investigators expect to receive from McNeil Consumer Healthcare a plan for the drug company to fix glaring quality control problems revealed by its recall of 136 million bottles of children's over-the-counter medicines. But Congress needs a plan for strengthening federal law so the U.S. Food and Drug Administration can properly inspect drug manufacturing plants and force recalls of potentially defective drugs.
The McNeil case deserves the intense scrutiny it is getting from the FDA and Congress. Among the accusations against McNeil, a division of Johnson & Johnson, is that it once dispatched contractors to stores to buy up bottles of a defective medicine in order to avoid a recall. The FDA is investigating numerous quality problems with national brand medicines made by McNeil - medicines found in most American homes.
The company has announced at least five recalls since September, including the April 30 recall of 136 million bottles of children's liquid Tylenol, Motrin, Benadryl and Zyrtec that could be contaminated with metal particles or have incorrect amounts of active ingredients. The company announced that recall after FDA inspectors found violations of manufacturing quality standards at McNeil's Fort Washington, Pa., plant.
Unfortunately, McNeil also produced other companies' products at the plant. Blacksmith Brands, which distributes PediaCare children's medicines, soon recalled some of its products because they were made in the Fort Washington plant.
During a congressional hearing, the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform grilled McNeil and Johnson & Johnson executives, asking why the defective products were allowed to leave the manufacturing plant. McNeil shut down the plant and it has not yet reopened.
Committee Chairman Edolphus Towns, D-N.Y., charged during the hearing that in 2008 McNeil allegedly attempted to avoid a recall by using private contractors to go to stores and buy Motrin caplets the company had learned would not dissolve properly. Other allegations against McNeil, which Towns said would be explored in future congressional hearings, include sloppy manufacturing procedures and brazenly ignoring consumers' adverse drug reactions.
Americans may be surprised to learn that the FDA can't order a recall, even when it knows drugs are defective. The revelations in the McNeil case should convince Congress that the FDA needs the manpower and regulatory muscle to regularly inspect drug manufacturing facilities, pull dangerous drugs off the market immediately and hold their manufacturers accountable.
 Load-Date: July 7, 2010

 

End of Document


Bedford Labs recalling cancer drug cytarabine
The Associated Press State & Local Wire
March 8, 2012 Thursday 5:15 PM GMT

 Copyright 2012 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS
Length: 266 words
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




An Ohio drugmaker announced Thursday that it is recalling three production lots of cytarabine, a drug that is critical in treating leukemia but which has been in short supply because of previous recalls.
Bedford Laboratories said it is issuing the voluntary recall because of concerns about the sterility. It said no side effects have been reported, but an investigation of the manufacturing area found there was an elevated risk that the sterility of the drug could not be assured. The three production lots expire from March to May of 2014.
Cytarabine is a popular chemotherapy drug that is irreplaceable in fighting certain types of leukemia. Several other manufacturers stopped making the drug because of quality problems or a shortage of raw materials, which created a shortage of cytarabine.
Bedford Labs runs one of the largest manufacturing plants of sterile injectable drugs. It stopped producing cytarabine in November because it discovered that maintenance and testing of some of its equipment was overdue. It resumed production in the first quarter.
Recalls and manufacturing problems have also created shortages of two other popular cancer drugs: Doxil and preservative-free methotrexate. Doxil is used in the treatment of ovarian and other cancers, and preservative-free methotrexate is used against acute lymphoblastic leukemia, the most common type of cancer in children. Up to 90 percent of children treated with ALL are cured after treatment with methotrexate.
In February the Food and Drug Administration approved additional sources for the drugs in order to deal with the shortages.
 Load-Date: March 9, 2012

 

End of Document


Pills recalled by drug maker
The Leader-Post (Regina, Saskatchewan)
February 9, 2011 Wednesday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2011 The Leader-Post, a division of Canwest MediaWorks Publication Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. C10
Length: 220 words
Byline: Postmedia News
Body




Six types of over-the-counter drugs have been taken off store shelves across the country due to "possible contamination between product lines," Health Canada announced Tuesday.
Pharmetics Inc., a pharmaceutical company in Laval, Que., voluntarily recalled the six products after a Health Canada inspection at its plant uncovered "deficiencies" on the assembly line.
A Health Canada statement posted late Tuesday said some of the products could have been labelled with the wrong expiry dates or could have been contaminated by other drugs made at the facility.
The products are all labelled as the in-house brand of the store that sells them.
The affected drugs are: - Extra Strength Acetaminophen Tablets (500 mg, sold at Loblaws and Shoppers)
- Acetaminophen, Caffeine & 8mg Codeine Phosphate Tablets (sold at Loblaws, Shoppers, Rexall, and Procurity)
- Muscle and Back Pain Relief Extra Strength Tablets (sold at Loblaws, Rexall, Safeway, Uniprix, Jean Coutu, Value Drug Mart and Federated Co-op)
- Sinus Medication Night Tablets (sold at Shoppers, Rexall and Proxim)
- Daytime Sinus Relief Extra Strength Tablets (sold at Shoppers, Jean Coutu and Proxim)
- Allergy & Sinus Relief Extra Strength Tablets (sold at Shoppers and Rexall)
Health Canada said anyone who purchased the products should return them to the place of purchase.
 Load-Date: February 9, 2011

 

End of Document


USFDA Raps Sun Pharma for Laxity in Follow-up for Recalled Drugs
Economic Times (E-Paper Edition)
October 11, 2014 Saturday
Delhi Edition

 Copyright 2014 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: COMPANIES
Length: 597 words
Byline: Soma.Das1@timesgroup.com
Body




India's top drug maker Sun Pharmaceutical Industries has received a rap from the United States regulator for being lax in monitoring the follow-up corrective actions for the drugs it recalled from the US market early this year.
The company has not put in place a proper formalised corrective and preventive action plan for the diabetes drug (Metformin extended release) it recalled, the US Food & Drug Administration investigators noted after inspecting Sun Pharma's Halol plant in Gujarat last month, according to a copy of form 483 reviewed by ET.
The form is used by the FDA to document concerns discovered during its inspections.
The company failed in the requisite measures despite telling the US government that "all the (corrective) actions (related to Metformin drug recall) have been implemented", the investigators added.
Similarly, the company did not put in place any formal corrective plans for anxiety drug Venlafaxine Hydrochloride extended release tablets, for which it initiated a recall four months ago, the inspectors noted.
They further noted that the building used in the manufacturing of a drug product "is not maintained in a good state of repair". "For example, on September 8, 2014 we observed water stains with ceiling damage and on September 12, 2014 we observed water leaks from the ceiling in the personnel corridor of the parenteral manufacturing ar
ea," the team of FDA investigators Parul Patel, Daniel Roberts and Thomas Arista noted.
These are part of 23 adverse observations that the investigators have made in three separate categories - unit for making solid drugs (tablets, capsules), parenteral drugs (injectables, intravenous products) and the quality control lab.
A Sun Pharma spokesperson refused to comment on the matter.
Analysts who have reviewed the document felt the chances of the US FDA blocking imports from the plant are slim but do not rule out future product approvals from the plant getting blocked. This could adversely impact the company's growth prospects in the US.
"There are no data integrity issues in the form and therefore chances of import alert are low.However, observations include several procedural issues where
resolution could take time and till then approvals could be blocked possibly," Anubhav Aggarwal of brokerage Credit Suisse said in a report.
This will impact the company's growth since its fastest growing division has been the US sales from the Indian plants, said the report, which estimated that the facility accounted for about 20-25% of the company's profits.
Another Gujarat-based plant of Sun Pharma at Karkhadi was banned from shipping to the US early this year.
The FDA investigators also objected to the practice of four-five individuals accessing sensitive production equipment through a common password. "There is no document to describe role and responsibilities of system administrators for the production equipment, no record to document the individuals who have access to production equipment," says the form 483.
The inspectors chided the firm for not documenting alarm events that occur during the routine tablet compression, among other observations.
Facilities of leading Indian drug makers including Ranbaxy (which Sun is in the process of acquiring) and Wockhardt were blacklisted by the US regulator last year. The FDA has been intensifying scrutiny on companies in India, the second-largest supplier of generic drugs to the country.
The drug regulator has said it will increase its activity in India as the country is the source for more than 40% of generics and over-thecounter drugs used in the US.
 Load-Date: October 11, 2014

 

End of Document


UK regulator recalls 16 Wockhardt drugs
Daily Tribune
July 13, 2013 Saturday

 Copyright 2013 Alayam Newspaper. Provided by Syndigate.info, an Albawaba.com company All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 266 words
Body




  Britain's healthcare regula tor has recalled 16 drugs from Indian pharmaceutical firm Wockhardt after finding deficiencies at one of its local manufacturing plants, the company said yesterday. The recall throws the spotlight on the Indian industry, which has come under recent scrutiny over suspected manufacturing problems at factories, including two of those of generic drug maker Ranbaxy. It is the second setback for Wockhardt in recent months, after the US Food and Drug Administration banned imports from the same Waluj manufacturing unit in western India over quality concerns in May. Wockhardt said that the new recall will result in a one-time impact of £1.5 million ($ 2.27 million), adding to a loss of up to $100 million in annualised revenue from the US action. Britain's Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) has described the action as a "precautionary recall" after it found manufacturing deficiencies.
It clarified however that only pharmacies, dispensing clinics and wholesalers have been asked to return the medicines in a variety of strengths and patients could continue to use the products. "Patients do not need to return their medicines because there is no evidence that the medicines affected by the precautionary recall in the UK are defective," the MHRA said on its website. "Therefore, it's important that people continue to take their medicines as prescribed." In May, Ranbaxy ended a lengthy legal battle after it pleaded guilty to US charges of selling adulterated antibiotic, epilepsy and other drugs and agreed to a record $500-million fine.  
 Load-Date: July 13, 2013

 

End of Document


California-based company recalls anemia drugs
Xinhua General News Service
September 24, 2010 Friday 2:55 PM EST

 Copyright 2010 Xinhua News Agency
Section: WORLD NEWS; Science, Cultural, Education, Health
Length: 294 words
Dateline: LOS ANGELES Sept. 24
Body




   California-based  biotechnology company Amgen announced on Friday that it is  recalling certain lots of anemia drugs Epogen and Procrit because  they may contain "extremely thin" glass flakes. 
    The glass flakes are "barely visible in most cases" and that  there have been no complaints or serious events reported in  relation to the glass flakes, Amgen said in a statement. 
    But there was "a low potential to impact patients who may have  received the affected product," the statement said. 
    The "extremely" thin glass flakes have resulted from the  interaction of the formulation with glass vials over the shelf  life of the product, the statement said. 
    "Evaluations by Amgen and Centocor Ortho Biotech ... found a  low potential to impact patients who may have received the  affected product," the statement said. 
    The recall, being conducted in cooperation with the Food and  Drug Administration, shouldn't disrupt the supply of the drug to  patients, nor will it have a material financial impact on the  company, said Amgen spokeswoman Emma Hurley. 
    Epogen and Procrit are manufactured in the United States by  Amgen. Epogen is sold by Amgen in the United States, and Centocor  Ortho Biotech is the authorized distributor of Procrit in the  country. 
    "Amgen and Centocor Ortho Biotech Products and their affiliate  companies have initiated recall letters and other communication to  immediately inform relevant stakeholders, including healthcare  professionals, distributors, wholesalers and pharmacies of the  voluntary recall," the statement said. 
    Epogen is used to treat anemia in kidney failure patients who  are on dialysis, and Procrit treats anemia in cancer patients  receiving chemotherapy and in some patients with HIV.  
 Load-Date: September 25, 2010

 

End of Document


California-based company recalls anemia drugs
Xinhua General News Service
September 24, 2010 Friday 1:16 AM EST

 Copyright 2010 Xinhua News Agency
Section: WORLD NEWS; Science, Cultural, Education, Health
Length: 294 words
Dateline: LOS ANGELES Sept. 24
Body




   California-based  biotechnology company Amgen announced on Friday that it is  recalling certain lots of anemia drugs Epogen and Procrit because  they may contain "extremely thin" glass flakes. 
    The glass flakes are "barely visible in most cases" and that  there have been no complaints or serious events reported in  relation to the glass flakes, Amgen said in a statement. 
    But there was "a low potential to impact patients who may have  received the affected product," the statement said. 
    The "extremely" thin glass flakes have resulted from the  interaction of the formulation with glass vials over the shelf  life of the product, the statement said. 
    "Evaluations by Amgen and Centocor Ortho Biotech ... found a  low potential to impact patients who may have received the  affected product," the statement said. 
    The recall, being conducted in cooperation with the Food and  Drug Administration, shouldn't disrupt the supply of the drug to  patients, nor will it have a material financial impact on the  company, said Amgen spokeswoman Emma Hurley. 
    Epogen and Procrit are manufactured in the United States by  Amgen. Epogen is sold by Amgen in the United States, and Centocor  Ortho Biotech is the authorized distributor of Procrit in the  country. 
    "Amgen and Centocor Ortho Biotech Products and their affiliate  companies have initiated recall letters and other communication to  immediately inform relevant stakeholders, including healthcare  professionals, distributors, wholesalers and pharmacies of the  voluntary recall," the statement said. 
    Epogen is used to treat anemia in kidney failure patients who  are on dialysis, and Procrit treats anemia in cancer patients  receiving chemotherapy and in some patients with HIV.  
 Load-Date: September 26, 2010

 

End of Document


Recalled blood pressure drugs pose very low cancer risk
Spokesman Review (Spokane, WA)
March 28, 2019 Thursday
Main Edition

 Copyright 2019 Spokane Spokesman-Review
Section: D; Pg. 003
Length: 494 words
Byline: Joe Graedon, M.S., and Teresa Graedon, Ph.D. King Features Syndicate
Body




People's Pharmacy
 Q. I am very concerned about all the recalls of blood pressure pills. When valsartan was first recalled, my doctor put me on losartan. Before long, that was also recalled. In the meantime, my blood pressure was not well-controlled.
 I'm back on valsartan now, but I have no confidence that it is safe to take it. I can't afford the brand name, Diovan. Do I die from cancer or from a heart attack or stroke?
 A. Since July, millions of blood pressure pills have been recalled because of nitrosamine impurities. The drugs include irbesartan, losartan and valsartan.
 According to the Food and Drug Administration, the risk of cancer is very low, even though the recalled medicines have been contaminated with suspected carcinogens for four years or longer. That said, most people would prefer to avoid potential cancer-causing chemicals in their medicines.
 A perspective published in the New England Journal of Medicine (March 13, 2019) points out that doctors may find it challenging to switch patients from one medication, such as valsartan, to another, such as losartan. There aren't good studies to guide them on how to adjust the dosages.
 The average retail price for a month's supply of brand name Diovan (160 mg) is $320, according to GoodRx.com.
 Q. I have been hearing about the importance of intestinal microbiota for our health. How do drugs such as Nexium affect these microbes that live in our digestive tracts over the long term?
 A. Investigators have found that acid-suppressing drugs such as esomeprazole (Nexium) can alter the balance of bacteria in our digestive tracts (Journal of Clinical Biochemistry and Nutrition, January 2018). Such changes may predispose people taking these PPI medications (including lansoprazole, omeprazole and others) to intestinal infections with C. difficile. Some researchers believe that "the effects of PPI are more prominent than the effects of antibiotics or other commonly used drugs" (Gut, May 2016).
 Q. My wife has Sjogren's syndrome and some other autoimmune problems. She is currently taking Plaquenil, which worries us because it can cause serious vision problems.
 I found a reference to using low-dose naltrexone as an alternative treatment with few side effects. Can you comment on the efficacy of this drug for autoimmune problems?
 A. Naltrexone is an oral form of the opioid antagonist naloxone. At the standard 50-mg dose, it is approved for treating alcoholism and other substance abuse disorders.
 Off-label, low-dose naltrexone (1 to 4.5 mg) is being considered for use against chronic pain (Senior Care Pharmacist, Jan. 1, 2019), fibromyalgia (Current Rheumatology Reviews, 2018) and certain autoimmune conditions (International Immunopharmacology, August 2018).
 We haven't found any studies of low-dose naltrexone for Sjogren's syndrome, which causes dry mouth, dry eyes and complications affecting other organs.
 Write Joe and Teresa Graedon via their website: www.PeoplesPharmacy.com.
 Load-Date: March 29, 2019

 

End of Document


-FDA requests recall of sterile compounded drug products produced by Pacifico National Inc., dba AmEx Pharmacy
ENP Newswire
August 28, 2019 Wednesday

 Copyright 2019 Normans Media Limited All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 795 words
Body




The U.S. Food and Drug Administration is reminding patients and health care professionals not to use drug products intended to be sterile made by Pacifico National Inc., an outsourcing facility doing business as AmEx Pharmacy, in Melbourne, Florida.

The drugs-which include compounded ophthalmic products among other drug products pose unnecessary risks due to significant quality and sterility concerns.

'When the FDA becomes aware of drugs that have the potential to cause harm to American consumers, we will alert the public, Prior to today's outreach, AmEx Pharmacy refused to recall all sterile drug products and has not adequately addressed FDA's concern that it is manufacturing drugs that are not in line with the quality standards we've set, putting patients at risk,' said Acting FDA Commissioner Ned Sharpless, M.D. 'We urge drug manufacturers and compounders to take appropriate action to ensure quality medicines as the agency continues our efforts to protect public health.'

An FDA inspection of AmEx Pharmacy's facility found conditions that could cause the company's drugs to become contaminated or otherwise pose risks to patients. As a result, the agency recommended on June 25that AmEx Pharmacy voluntarily recall all unexpired drugs intended to be sterile and cease sterile operations until the company takes adequate corrective actions. However, AmEx Pharmacy declined to initiate a recall of all unexpired drugs intended to be sterile and has not provided adequate assurances regarding the sterility and quality of its remaining and newly manufactured products.

Because of this, the agency today issued a formal request to the outsourcing facility to recall all non-expired lots of drugs intended to be sterile. The FDA is also urging consumers to stop using these drugs and dispose of them immediately. Additionally, the agency is requesting the outsourcing facility cease production of drugs intended to be sterile until adequate remediation actions have been taken.

Administration of a non-sterile drug intended to be sterile presents the risk of infection. Intraocular medications which are not sterile can lead to intraocular infections such as endophthalmitis which, depending on the infecting microorganism, can lead to a loss of partial or total permanent visual function (i.e., no light perception). Patients who have concerns about receiving any drug produced by AmEx Pharmacy or who observe signs of an infection after using these medicines should contact their health care professional.

Health care professionals should immediately check their medical supplies, quarantine any drugs intended to be sterile and prepared by AmEx Pharmacy, and not administer or provide them to patients. The FDA urges health care professionals who obtained drugs from AmEx Pharmacy to make alternative arrangements to obtain medications from sources that adhere to proper quality standards.

'Although compounded drugs can serve an important need for some patients, they present a higher risk because they do not undergo premarket review to ensure that they are safe and effective for their intended use and to verify their manufacturing quality,' said Donald D. Ashley, director of compliance for the FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. 'The agency's compounding program aims to protect patients from unsafe, ineffective and poor-quality compounded drugs, while preserving access to compounded drugs for patients for whom an FDA-approved drug is not medically appropriate.'

The FDA has received reports of adverse events associated with the use of AmEx Pharmacy's drugs. The FDA encourages health care professionals and consumers to report adverse events to the FDA's MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program: Complete and submit the report online at www.fda.gov/medwatch/report.htm; or Download and complete the form, then submit it via fax at 1-800-FDA-0178.

AmEx Pharmacy is registered as an outsourcing facility under section 503B of the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act. The Drug Quality and Security Act, signed into law on Nov. 27, 2013, added a new section 503B to the FDC Act. Under section 503B, a compounder can elect to register as an outsourcing facility.

The FDA, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, protects the public health by assuring the safety, effectiveness, and security of human and veterinary drugs, vaccines and other biological products for human use, and medical devices. The agency also is responsible for the safety and security of our nation's food supply, cosmetics, dietary supplements, products that give off electronic radiation, and for regulating tobacco products.

Contact:

Jeremy Kahn
Tel: (301) 796-8671

[Editorial queries for this story should be sent to newswire@enpublishing.co.uk ]   
 Load-Date: August 28, 2019

 

End of Document


Recent drug recalls worry investors
eHealth
March 19, 2013

 Copyright 2013 eHealth, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 517 words
Body




Drug recalls from the US in the recent past by Indian companies have raised concern among industry experts as well as the investor fraternity. Some of the major pharmaceutical companies such as Ranbaxy Laboratories Ltd, Glenmark Pharmaceuticals Ltd, Dr Reddy's Laboratories Ltd and Sun Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd have recalled their products from the world's largest drug market, the US, in the past seven months, according to data available on US Food and Drugs Administration's (FDA) website.
Besides, a few foreign players had to recall some of their products, which were outsourced to Indian companies for manufacturing.
Recently, Dr Reddy's recalled its anti-depression drug, Citalopram, from the US following complaints of a strong odour. Mumbai-based Glenmark also conducted a retail or pharmacy level recall of its allergy and asthma drug, Montelukast sodium tablets, 10 mg, in February. "The recall has been initiated based on multiple complaints received from a number of pharmacists and consumers. They have reported they detect an off-odour, described as moldy, musty or fishy in nature After initial investigation, the source for the moldy or musty odour has been identified as the presence of trace levels of Tribromoanisole and Trichloroanisole," Glenmark said after the recall.
Not long ago in November last year, Ranbaxy had recalled its major revenue churning generic version of Lipitor from the US after it suspected the presence of tiny glass particles in some of the batches. While the company recently managed to restart manufacturing of the drug from its US facility, it is yet to restore the same from its Indian unit in Mohali.
While some say a certain amount of recall is part of the pharma business, many feel such a trend may lead to concerns over quality of manufacturing in Indian facilities.
"Recalls happen, but an increasing and frequent trend could indicate towards concerns in manufacturing, which is not good for the industry at large. It's also significant to note that US FDA is becoming more stringent, and is tightening its quality norms, particularly for generics, because the competition is increasing," says an industry expert, requesting anonymity.
Another analyst, with a domestic brokerage, adds: "As the penetration of generics is increasing, the domestic players need to be more cautious about their quality of manufacturing because the regulator is expected to tighten its scrutiny. Repeated recalls may not just impact the company's revenues but also the overall sentiment of investors." The analyst also did not want to be named.
Last year, even some of the multinational companies such as Pfizer Inc and Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd had to recall some of their products, which were outsourced to Indian companies for manufacturing.
However, some experts are also of the opinion that drug recalls are usual in pharmaceutical business as long as they are not of serious order. Most of the recalls in the recent past have been of class III and IV, which are not considered very serious. However, some like that of Ranbaxy and Dr Reddy's were of class II.
 Load-Date: March 19, 2013

 

End of Document


FDA expands recall of blood pressure drug
Newstex Blogs
Western Free Press( Arizona)
August 10, 2018 Friday 7:06 PM EST

 Copyright 2018 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 870 words
Body




Aug 10, 2018( Western Free Press: http://www.westernfreepress.com/Delivered by Newstex)  The US Food and Drug Administration expanded the list of drugs[1] being recalled that contain valsartan. The drug is used as a component in a set of drugs used to treat heart failure and blood pressure. New to the list are some valsartan products manufactured by Hetero Labs Ltd. 
in India, which are labeled as Camber Pharmaceuticals Inc. Test results show that some of the products may be tainted[2]. The FDA announced a valsartan recall in July[3] after lab tests revealed that some drugs could have been tainted with a substance linked to higher risk of cancer. The drug had been recalled in 22 other countries. The expanded recall includes some drugs that contain valsartan and hydrochlorothisazide. Not all of the drugs containing valsartan were affected.[4] N-nitrosodimethylamine or NDMA, the impurity the lab tests found, is considered a possible carcinogen[5] by the US Environmental Protection Agency. It is an organic chemical that has been used to make liquid rocket fuel, and it can be unintentionally introduced through certain chemical reactions. It's a byproduct of the manufacturing of some pesticides and fish processing. The medicines that are now a part of this expanded list [6]in the recall are tablets sold by AvKare, A-S Medication Solutions LLC, Bryant Ranch Prepack Inc, Camber Pharmaceuticals, Inc. H J Harkins Company, Northwind Pharmaceuticals, NuCare Pharmaceuticals Inc., Prinston Pharmaceutical Inc. (labeled as Solco Healthcare LLC), Proficient Rx LP, Remedy Repack, Teva Pharmaceuticals (labeled as Major Pharmaceuticals), Teva Pharmaceuticals USA (labeled as Actavis). The FDA also published a list of valsartan products that are not currently recalled[7]. Only the drugs suspected of being tainted with NDMA are on the recall list[8]. If you are taking a valsartan drug, look for the company name on your prescription bottle. If the information isn't on the label, you can call your pharmacy for those details. The recalled medicine is linked to a manufacturer in China. The substances were supplied by Zhejiang Huahai Pharmaceuticals, based in Linhai, in eastern China, which said it notified authorities as soon as it identified the impurity. 'We published our recall notice at midday on July 13 in China and overseas, and published the US market recall notice on July 14 Beijing time all the drug materials for the Chinese market were recalled by July 23,' the company said in a statement to the Shanghai stock exchange last month. The FDA said[9] on its website that it's working with drug manufacturers 'to ensure future valsartan active pharmaceutical ingredients are not at risk.' If you are worried that your drug could be on the recall list, talk with your doctor or pharmacist before changing any routine with your medicine. Because not all valsartan drugs are involved in the recall, they might be able to switch you to a version of the drug made by another company. If you know your drug is on the recall list, the FDA suggests you continue taking it until your doctor or pharmacist provides a replacement. To get a sense of what taking a tainted drug could mean, FDA scientists estimated that if 8,000 people took the highest dose of valsartan (320 milligrams) from the recalled batches every day for four years, there may be one additional case of cancer.[10] 'The key with this is, patients should not stop taking their medication abruptly, that definitely can be harmful,' Dr. Mary Ann Bauman, a representative for the American Heart Association, said in July. 'You don't want to jump to any conclusions on your own about this medication, or any medication for that matter. Definitely talk with your doctor first.' Originally posted at https://www.abc15.com/news/national/fda-expands-recall-of-blood-pressure-drug-valsartan-due-to-cancer-concern[11]. The post FDA expands recall of blood pressure drug[12] appeared first on Western Free Press[13]. [ 1]:            https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/DrugSafety/UCM615703.pdf [ 2]:            https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm613916.htm?utm_campaign=FDA%20MedWatch%20Recall%20Notice%20-%20Valsartan-Containing%20Product%20by%3A%20Hetero%20Labsutm_medium=emailutm_source=Eloqua [ 3]:            http://www.cnn.com/2018/07/13/health/valsartan-recall-fda-bn/index.html [ 4]:            https://www.fda.gov/NewsEvents/Newsroom/PressAnnouncements/ucm613532.htm [ 5]:            https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2014-03/documents/ffrrofactsheet_contaminant_ndma_january2014_final.pdf [ 6]:            https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/DrugSafety/UCM615703.pdf [ 7]:            https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/DrugSafety/UCM615704.pdf [ 8]:            https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/DrugSafety/UCM615703.pdf [ 9]:            https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm613916.htm [ 10]:            https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm613916.htm [ 11]:            https://www.abc15.com/news/national/fda-expands-recall-of-blood-pressure-drug-valsartan-due-to-cancer-concern [ 12]:            https://westernfreepress.com/fda-expands-recall-of-blood-pressure-drug/ [ 13]:            https://westernfreepress.com 
 Load-Date: August 10, 2018

 

End of Document


Israeli Drugmaker Teva Recalls Four Drugs Manufactured in Hungary
International Pharmaceutical Regulatory Monitor
October 2016

 Copyright 2016 Washington Business Information, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Length: 219 words
Body




Teva has recalled four injected drugs made at its plant in Hungary after an FDA ban on imports from the plant.
Teva has recalled 92,480 containers of the antibiotic linezolid; 14,661 vials of the heart surgery drug eptifibatide; 13,223 vials of the anti-nausea drug ondansetron and 1,299 bags of argatroban, which is used for heparin-related issues.
According to Teva, the recalls began in June, but the FDA didn't give the recall a class II designation until earlier this month.
Teva's $110 million, 15,000-square-meter sterile injectables plant in Godollo, Hungary, opened in 2012. The plant has six production lines and the capacity to make 160 million to 200 million units of injectable medications annually. The FDA shut the plant down temporarily after an inspection in January exposed a number of manufacturing issues.
"We are working around the clock to re-start manufacturing operations in Godollo and expect that to occur in the coming months," a Teva spokesperson said.
Teva did not specify the issues listed in the 483 form, but did say it was working with the FDA to solve the problems. Additionally, the company said it is unaware of any adverse effects or issues related to the drugs shipped from the facility, and none of the drugs are on the FDA's drug shortages list. -- Derek Major
Release date: 20161018
 Load-Date: October 18, 2016

 

End of Document


Drug recalls are more widespread than previously thought
Impact News Service
February 20, 2019 Wednesday

 Copyright 2019 Impact Media Limited All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 320 words
Body




Washington, DC: American Pharmacists Association has issued the following press release:
From January 2013 to October 2018, approximately 8,000 medications were recalled by pharmaceutical companies across the United States and abroad, the KHN report indicates. Causes ranged from adulteration—the strength of an active ingredient was lower/higher than standards allow, or bacteria/mold or glass/rubber particles were present—to mislabeling and sterility concerns.
“We all want to be able to trust that what we are dispensing is safe and effective, so these kinds of situations are really disturbing,” said Ashley Trask, PharmD, pharmacy supervisor at Medication Policy & Safety at UC Davis Health System, who was not involved in the KHN investigation. “The bottom line: As care providers, we are horrified by these types of situations.”
The KHN report also found that more than 2,500 facilities remained uninspected over a 5-year timespan, and more than 1,600 facilities, including 400 located outside the U.S , had not been inspected in 10 years.
“Nobody is looking over the shoulder of these drug manufacturers overseas,” said David Gortler, PharmD, PhD, former senior FDA medical officer. “No one’s making sure that these so-called sweatshop countries are doing a reliable job.”
Gortler, a consultant with Former FDA.com, said that U.S drug facilities are subjected to rigorous inspection—“everything from engineering to pharmacologists”—once every 24 months. In contrast, overseas inspections occur every 6 to 7 years, he said. Considering travel requirements, including notifying departments of state, “there may be a leak” of the visit that compromises FDA’s ability to perform thorough impromptu inspections.
“FDA does everything possible … to address any potential risks in a sustainable way that will help ensure continued patient access to vital, safe, and effective drugs,” said FDA spokesperson Kristofer Baumgartner.
 Load-Date: February 20, 2019

 

End of Document


Europe issues 2nd recall of drugs made by Ben Venue
FiercePharma Manufacturing
December 12, 2011 Monday

 Copyright 2011 Questex Media Group LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 292 words
Byline: George Miller
Body




Ben Venue is back in the news for product quality shortcomings with Europe's recommendation Friday of additional precautionary drug recalls. The European Medicines Agency issued a similar recall for drugs made at a troubled Ben Venue plant in late November.
The current recall recommendation is for batches of a Pfizer ($PFE) antifungal and a diagnostic agent because of potential contamination. In a statement, the EMA also asks doctors to inspect vials of a diluting agent used with Pfizer cancer drug Torisel, as well as vials of EpiCept's ($EPCT) Ceplene cancer drug, to check for particles.
A Dow Jones report says Pfizer has developed exit strategies for its drugs made by Ben Venue.
The EMA action comes two weeks after the agency's Nov. 28 recall recommendation for some cancer and antiviral drugs made at Ben Venue's Bedford, OH, plant. The EMA cited "shortcomings in the quality management system, particularly in relation to the aseptic filling process," in a previous announcement.
The EMA categorizes Ceplene, a leukemia treatment, and Torisel, a drug for kidney cancer, as essential because of the lack of other sources. The statement says doctors should check vials for particles.
Ben Venue, a unit of Boehringer Ingelheim, announced the shutdown of the plant Nov. 19. The company said in a statement that it was working on preventive maintenance and manufacturing equipment requalification that were overdue.
- here's the story
- here's the current EMA            release
- and the earlier            release
Related Articles:
Theravance MRSA drug a victim of Ben Venue shutdown
           Europe takes precautions with Ben Venue drugs
           Ben Venue shutdown strains J&J drug supply
           Turbulence ahead for cancer drugs with Ben Venue exit
           Ben Venue having trouble filling jobs at Ohio plant
 Load-Date: April 29, 2013

 

End of Document
