
User Name: = 
Date and Time: = 2024-12-01
Job Number: = 239784956

Documents (200)
Client/Matter: -None-
Search Terms: drug recall
Search Type: NaturalAnd
Content Type
Narrowed by
news
Industry: Pharmaceuticals & Biotechnology Geography News: North America Timeline: 01 Jan, 2020 to 31 Dec, 2024 

1. Cipla, Glenmark Recall Drugs In US Due To Manufacturing Issues

2. Cipla , Glenmark recall drugs in US due to manufacturing issues

3. Sun Pharma, Hetero recall drugs in US

4. Alembic , Aurobindo recall drugs in US market

5. Sun Pharma , Hetero recall drugs in the US market

6. Anxiety drug recalled over 'life-threatening' label mistake

7. FDA Recalls Drug Distributed in Puerto Rico

8. Anxiety drug recalled over 'life-threatening' label mistake

9. KVK-Tech Recalls Hypertension Drug Betaxolol Tablets

10. Pakistan recalls drug suspected of causing blindness in diabetes patients

11. Litigation over recalled drug weighs on GSK, Haleon and Sanofi stocks

12. Zenzedi, ADHD drug recalled for pill mix-ups

13. Anxiety drug Clonazepam recalled for mislabeling; could cause a 'life-threatening' event

14. Viona Pharmaceuticals Recalls Diabetes Drug Metformin

15. Viona Pharmaceuticals Recalls Diabetes Drug Metformin

16. Viona Pharmaceuticals Recalls Diabetes Drug Metformin

17. Eisai Settles Recalled Diet Drug Cancer Claims

18. ADHD Drug Recall as Mislabeled Package Sparks Warning

19. Camber recalls pneumonia drug, citing possible microbial contamination

20. Accel , Mint and Pharmascience recall some drugs over efficacy test data concerns

21. Davina McCall recalls drug overdose

22. Camber recalls pneumonia drug, citing possible microbial contamination

23. Unichem, Macleods Pharma recall drugs from US market

24. Anvisa revokes recall of the drug losartana

25. Eli Lilly Recalls Hypoglycemia Drug

26. Anvisa revokes recall of the drug losartana

27. Blood Pressure Medication Recall 2021: Hypertension Drug Recalled Over Cancer Risks

28. Teva Recalls Drug Vials, Shuts Facility Over Mold Concerns

29. Eugia US Recalls Herpes Drug Acyclovir Sodium Injection

30. Eugia US Recalls Herpes Drug Acyclovir Sodium Injection

31. Pfizer 's Hospira recalls 3 drug lots over particulate concerns

32. Pfizer 's Hospira recalls 3 drug lots over particulate concerns

33. Eye drops recalled after drug-resistant bacteria outbreak

34. Diabetes Medication Recall 2020: More Metformin Drugs Recalled Over Cancer Concerns

35. Blood Pressure Medication Recall 2021: Hypertension Drug Recalled Over Potential Death Risk

36. ADHD Drug Recall as Mislabeled Package Sparks Warning

37. Diabetes Medication Recall 2021: Another Metformin Drug Recalled Over Possible Cancer Fears

38. Nephron recalls 2.1M drug doses, devices on sterility concerns

39. Sun Pharma issues recall of gout drug due to microbial contamination

40. Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up

41. ADHD drug Zenzedi recalled over pill mixup

42. Second time in amonth, Indian firm recalls eye drug from US

43. FDA posts a flurry of voluntary drug recalls by Teva , Glenmark , Apotex and VistaPharm

44. Lupin Pharmaceuticals Recalls Pregnancy Prevention Drug In US

45. Pfizer Recalls Anti-smoking Drug Chantix Tablets

46. Pfizer Recalls Anti-smoking Drug Chantix Tablets

47. Pfizer Recalls Anti-smoking Drug Chantix Tablets

48. New drug recall issued: Stop taking these cold & flu medicines immediately

49. Fla. Hospital Faces New Trial In Amputee's Recalled Drug Suit

50. Pfizer recalls migraine drug Nurtec ODT after millions of products lacked child resistant packaging

51. Aurobindo 's arm recalls ophthalmic drug in US

52. US recalls of India -made drugs expose regulatory, quality control gaps

53. Medtronic Recalls 6,000 Drug-Coated Balloons Shipped in Potentially Unsterile Packaging

54. New drug recall issued: Stop taking these cold & flu medicines immediately

55. Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up

56. Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up

57. Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up

58. Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up

59. Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up

60. Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up

61. Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up

62. Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up

63. Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up

64. DeLauro Celebrates FDA Mandatory Drug Recall Authority in the America COMPETES Act

65. Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up

66. Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up

67. Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up

68. Baxter begins Class I recall of drug dose calculation software

69. DELAURO CELEBRATES FDA MANDATORY DRUG RECALL AUTHORITY IN THE AMERICA COMPETES ACT

70. DELAURO CELEBRATES FDA MANDATORY DRUG RECALL AUTHORITY IN THE AMERICA COMPETES ACT

71. Dr. Reddy's Recalls Prescription Drug Blister Packages

72. Kathy Griffin Recalls Drug Addiction in Response to Hunter Biden Voicemail

73. Dr. Reddy's Recalls Prescription Drug Blister Packages

74. Dr. Reddy's Recalls Prescription Drug Blister Packages

75. Dr. Reddy's Recalls Prescription Drug Blister Packages

76. Sen. Peters Introduces Bill to Grant FDA Needed Authority to Recall Unsafe Drug Products, Protect Consumers

77. Rwanda recalls Kenya -made antifungal drug over quality concerns

78. Lupin recalls diabetes treatment drug in US

79. Panama recalls ranitidine drugs due to possible carcinogenic potential

80. Lupin recalls diabetes treatment drug in US

81. Peters Introduces Bill to Grant Food and Drug Administration Needed Authority to Recall Unsafe Drug Products, Protect Consumers

82. Lupin recalls diabetes treatment drug in US

83. PETERS INTRODUCES BILL TO GRANT FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION NEEDED AUTHORITY TO RECALL UNSAFE DRUG PRODUCTS, PROTECT CONSUMERS

84. Apotex Recalls Diabetes Drug Metformin HCL Extended-Release Tablets

85. Apotex Recalls Diabetes Drug Metformin HCL Extended-Release Tablets

86. Apotex Recalls Diabetes Drug Metformin HCL Extended-Release Tablets

87. Pfizer is forced to recall drug used to treat hypertension after pills were found to be contaminated with cancer-causing compounds

88. Taiwan FDA orders recall of defective hypertension drug

89. Sen. Peters Introduces Bill to Grant Food and Drug Administration Needed Authority to Recall Unsafe Drug Products, Protect Consumers

90. -RPS warns of misleading reports of drug recall

91. Acella Pharma Recalls Thyroid Drugs For Sub Potency

92. Acella Pharma Recalls Thyroid Drugs For Sub Potency

93. Acella Pharma Recalls Thyroid Drugs For Sub Potency

94. -RPS warns of misleading reports of drug recall

95. Acella Pharma Recalls Thyroid Drug For Super Potency

96. Acella Pharma Recalls Thyroid Drug For Super Potency

97. Innoveix Pharma Recalls All Sterile Compounded Drug Products

98. Lupin, Marksans Pharma, Among Others Recall Various Drugs in US Market: FDA Report

99. Acella Pharma Recalls Thyroid Drugs For Sub Potency

100. Innoveix Pharma Recalls All Sterile Compounded Drug Products

101. Innoveix Pharma Recalls All Sterile Compounded Drug Products

102. Acella Pharma Recalls Thyroid Drug For Super Potency

103. Acella Pharma Recalls Thyroid Drugs For Sub Potency

104. Acella Pharma Recalls Thyroid Drugs For Sub Potency

105. Nostrum Labs Expands Recall Of Diabetes Drug Metformin

106. Pfizer 's Hospira recalls 5 injectable drug lots due to report of leak, potential seal issues

107. Pfizer recalling popular stop-smoking drug Chantix

108. Nostrum Labs Expands Recall Of Diabetes Drug Metformin

109. Nostrum Labs Expands Recall Of Diabetes Drug Metformin

110. Govt notifies new drug-making standards after overseas deaths, gives firms up to a year to implement The new GMP focuses on quality control measures, allows mechanisms for digitally maintaining records that cannot be tampered with...

111. FDA Recalls Heartburn Drug Zantac Due To Cancer Risk

112. Pfizer recalls blood pressure drug due to potential carcinogen

113. Granules Pharma Recalls Diabetes Drug Metformin HCI Extended-Release Tablets

114. Eye drops recalled after US drug-resistant bacteria outbreak

115. Eye drops recalled after US drug-resistant bacteria outbreak

116. Eye drops recalled after US drug-resistant bacteria outbreak

117. Eye drops recalled after US drug-resistant bacteria outbreak

118. Eye drops recalled after US drug-resistant bacteria outbreak

119. Pfizer Recalls Hypertension Drug Accupril After Elevated Levels Of Cancer-Causing Chemicals Found

120. Eye drops recalled after US drug-resistant bacteria outbreak

121. Eye drops recalled after US drug-resistant bacteria outbreak

122. Eye drops recalled after US drug-resistant bacteria outbreak

123. Eye drops recalled after US drug-resistant bacteria outbreak

124. Eye drops recalled after US drug-resistant bacteria outbreak

125. Antacid Digene recalled in India after drugs regulator issues alert

126. Granules Pharma Recalls Diabetes Drug Metformin HCI Extended-Release Tablets

127. Pfizer Expands Recall Of Anti-smoking Drug Chantix

128. Pfizer Expands Recall Of Anti-smoking Drug Chantix

129. Pfizer Expands Recall Of Anti-smoking Drug Chantix

130. Granules Pharma Recalls Diabetes Drug Metformin HCI Extended-Release Tablets

131. Pfizer Expands Recall Of Anti-smoking Drug Chantix

132. Amended: Acella Pharma Recalls Thyroid Drug For Super Potency

133. Pfizer recalls blood pressure drugs including Accuretic for cancer risk due to nitrosamine

134. Pfizer recalls high blood pressure drug after chemicals that can cause cancer found

135. PharmaLink and Recall Results Announce Strategic Partnership to Enhance Drug Safety and Recall Efficiency

136. Amended: Acella Pharma Recalls Thyroid Drug For Super Potency

137. US recalled Beximco 's drug on diabetes be withdrawn from local market

138. Pfizer continues recalls of menopause drug Duavee on faulty packaging concerns

139. Drug Recall 2022: High Blood Pressure, Heart Medications Pulled Over Mislabeling Risks

140. Pfizer Recalls Blood Pressure Drug Over 'Impurity' Concerns

141. DeLauro Celebrates FDA Mandatory Drug Recall Authority in the America COMPETES Act Rep. Rosa L. DeLauro (D- CT ) News Release

142. Pfizer Recalls Blood Pressure Drug Over 'Impurity' Concerns

143. Diabetes Drug Recall 2020: More Metformin Medication Recalled For Cancer-Causing Ingredient Levels

144. DELAURO REITERATES CALL TO BAN RANITIDINE SALES, REINTRODUCES BILL TO GIVING FDA MANDATORY RECALL AUTHORITY OVER DRUGS

145. DeLauro Reiterates Call to Ban Ranitidine Sales, Reintroduces Bill to Giving FDA Mandatory Recall Authority Over Drugs

146. Peters Introduces Bill to Grant Food and Drug Administration Needed Authority to Recall Unsafe Drug Products, Protect Consumers Sen. Gary C. Peters (D- MI ) News Release

147. Britney Spears' former bodyguard recalls tearful, drugged star

148. Ronnie Wood's stepson recalls young drug use

149. Roundup: U.S. patients see wider drug recalls, limited price rise

150. Peters Introduces Bill to Grant Food and Drug Administration Needed Authority to Recall Unsafe Drug Products, Protect Consumers Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee News Release

151. Family Dollar recalls 430 products including drugs, sunscreen stored at wrong temperatures

152. United States : Eye Drops Recalled After US Drug-Resistant Bacteria Outbreak

153. Pfizer continues recalls of menopause drug Duavee on faulty packaging concerns

154. Pfizer recalling popular stop-smoking drug Chantix over impurities

155. Pfizer recalling popular stop-smoking drug Chantix over impurities

156. Drugs Recall: Company Pulling Dozens Of Human, Animal Meds After Filing For Bankruptcy

157. Pfizer recalling popular stop-smoking drug Chantix over impurities

158. Rep. DeLauro Celebrates FDA Mandatory Drug Recall Authority in America Creating Opportunities for Manufacturing, Pre-Eminence in Technology, and Economic Strength Act

159. Pfizer recalling popular stop-smoking drug Chantix over impurities

160. Pfizer recalling popular stop-smoking drug Chantix over impurities

161. US authorities recall eyedrops infected with drug-resistant bacteria

162. Pfizer recalling popular stop-smoking drug Chantix over impurities

163. What to Recall When Getting Drugs Online

164. Pfizer recalling popular stop-smoking drug Chantix over impurities

165. Indian drug firms recall various products in US market

166. Drug sold on Amazon recalled. ‘Hidden drug ingredients’ can cause death and diarrhea

167. Drug sold on Amazon recalled. ‘Hidden drug ingredients’ can cause death and diarrhea

168. Drug sold on Amazon recalled. ‘Hidden drug ingredients’ can cause death and diarrhea

169. Drug sold on Amazon recalled. ‘Hidden drug ingredients’ can cause death and diarrhea

170. Common anxiety drug taken by millions recalled over 'life-threatening' label mistake

171. Pfizer Recall: Another Blood Pressure Drug Pulled Over Impurity

172. Alembic and Aurobindo issue US drug recalls, citing quality and production issues

173. Lupin skids as failed USFDA specifications lead to recalls of 2 drugs

174. Pharmalink Inc. And Recall Results, Inc. Announce Strategic Partnership To Enhance Drug Safety And Recall Efficiency

175. PharmaLink Inc. and Recall Results, Inc. Announce Strategic Partnership to Enhance Drug Safety and Recall Efficiency

176. Widespread recalls affect popular diabetes drug

177. Diabetes Drug Metformin Recalled by Multiple Manufacturers Over Carcinogens

178. Teligent 's Post-Sale Drug Recall Puts Its Ch. 11 Plan In Doubt

179. Thyroid Medication Recall 2021: Drug Called Back Over Low-Potency Risk In Hypothyroidism Treatment

180. Pfizer 's smoking cessation drug recalled by Health Department

181. Family Dollar recalls over-the-counter drugs in Utah , 22 other states

182. Popular anxiety drug recalled over potentially ‘life-threatening’ issue

183. HIGH CARCINOGEN LEVELS CAUSE MORE DRUG RECALLS

184. Cancer fears spur recall of weight-loss drug

185. Cancer fears spur recall of weight-loss drug

186. Erectile dysfunction and depression drugs recalled after factory ‘mix up’

187. Pfizer Further Expands Recall Of Anti-smoking Drug Chantix

188. Pfizer Recalls Some Blood Pressure Drugs, Citing Cancer Risk

189. Some tianeptine products recalled as CDC links drug to 'cluster of severe illness'

190. Cancer concerns lead to 'precautionary' recall of anti-smoking drug

191. Cancer concerns lead to 'precautionary' recall of anti-smoking drug

192. Cancer concerns lead to 'precautionary' recall of anti-smoking drug

193. Cancer concerns lead to 'precautionary' recall of anti-smoking drug

194. Pfizer Further Expands Recall Of Anti-smoking Drug Chantix

195. Cancer concerns lead to 'precautionary' recall of anti-smoking drug

196. Cancer concerns lead to 'precautionary' recall of anti-smoking drug

197. DeLauro Reiterates Call to Ban Ranitidine Sales, Reintroduces Bill to Giving FDA Mandatory Recall Authority Over Drugs Rep. Rosa L. DeLauro (D- CT ) News Release

198. Pfizer recalling popular stop-smoking drug Chantix over impurities

199. Pfizer Further Expands Recall Of Anti-smoking Drug Chantix

200. Pfizer recalling popular stop-smoking drug Chantix over impurities




Cipla, Glenmark Recall Drugs In US Due To Manufacturing Issues
MENAFN - Business & Finance News (English)
May 5, 2024 Sunday

 Copyright 2024 MENAFN.COM All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 224 words
Body




Link to Image
Link to Story
New Delhi, May 5 (IANS) Drug makers Cipla and Glenmark are recalling their products from the US market due to manufacturing issues.In accordance with the latest Enforcement Report from the US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA), Cipla's subsidiary in New Jersey is recalling 59,244 packs of Ipratropium Bromide and Albuterol Sulfate Inhalation Solution.
The reason for recalling the affected lot of Cipla products is "short fill".
"Complaints received of less fill volume in respules and few drops of liquid observed in the intact pouch," the US health regulator said.
The recalled drug is used to help control the symptoms of lung diseases, including asthma, chronic bronchitis and emphysema.
As mentioned by the USFDA, Glenmark is recalling 3,264 bottles of Diltiazem Hydrochloride extended-release capsules, which are used to treat high blood pressure.
The US-based arm of the company, Glenmark Pharmaceuticals initiated the nationwide recall of the drug due to "failed dissolution specifications".
Meanwhile, drug maker Lupin has recalled products in the US market for manufacturing issues, according to the US health regulator.
As per the latest Enforcement Report by the USFDA, Lupin recalled 26,352 bottles of Rifampin Capsules (300 mg), an antibiotic medication in the US market.
MENAFN05052024000231011071ID1108174448
 Load-Date: July 15, 2024

 

End of Document


Cipla, Glenmark recall drugs in US due to manufacturing issues
IANS-English
May 5, 2024 Sunday

 Copyright 2024 IANS All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 216 words
Dateline: New Delhi, 2024-05-05 14:01:20 
Body




  New Delhi, May 5 (IANS) Drug makers Cipla and Glenmark are recalling their products from the US market due to manufacturing issues.
  In accordance with the latest Enforcement Report from the US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA), Cipla's subsidiary in New Jersey is recalling 59,244 packs of Ipratropium Bromide and Albuterol Sulfate Inhalation Solution.
The reason for recalling the affected lot of Cipla products is "short fill".
"Complaints received of less fill volume in respules and few drops of liquid observed in the intact pouch," the US health regulator said.
The recalled drug is used to help control the symptoms of lung diseases, including asthma, chronic bronchitis and emphysema.
As mentioned by the USFDA, Glenmark is recalling 3,264 bottles of Diltiazem Hydrochloride extended-release capsules, which are used to treat high blood pressure.
The US-based arm of the company, Glenmark Pharmaceuticals initiated the nationwide recall of the drug due to "failed dissolution specifications".
Meanwhile, drug maker Lupin has recalled products in the US market for manufacturing issues, according to the US health regulator.
As per the latest Enforcement Report by the USFDA, Lupin recalled 26,352 bottles of Rifampin Capsules (300 mg), an antibiotic medication in the US market.
--IANS
shs/svn 
 Load-Date: May 5, 2024

 

End of Document


Sun Pharma, Hetero recall drugs in US
Express Pharma
April 24, 2023

 Copyright 2023 Express Pharma, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
Length: 257 words
Byline: EP News Bureau
Body




Sun Pharma is recalling a generic drug indicated to raise blood pressure in adults while Hetero Labs is recalling a drug used to treat certain stomach and oesophagus problems
Sun Pharma and Hetero are recalling products in the US market for manufacturing issues, according to the US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA). As per the US health regulator's latest Enforcement Report, the US-based arm of Sun Pharma is recalling a generic drug indicated to raise blood pressure in adult patients with acute hypotension.
Sun Pharma is recalling 16,450 vials of Norepinephrine Bitartrate Injection for "failed impurities/degradation specifications", it said.
The affected lot has been manufactured by Gland Pharma and distributed in the US by Sun Pharma, the USFDA stated. Sun Pharma initiated the Class III nationwide recall (US) on March 29 this year.
In a separate disclosure, USFDA informed that the US-based arm of Hetero Labs is recalling a drug used to treat certain stomach and oesophagus problems
Hetero US is recalling 2,352 bottles of Pantoprazole Sodium delayed-release tablets for 'CGMP Deviations: Discoloration', the US FDA stated. The affected lot was produced by Hetero Labs for Camber Pharmaceuticals, it added.
Hetero USA initiated the Class II recall on March 14 this year.
As per the USFDA, a Class II recall is initiated in a situation where the use of, or exposure to, a violative product may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences or where the probability of serious adverse health consequences is remote.
 Load-Date: April 25, 2023

 

End of Document


Alembic, Aurobindo recall drugs in US market
Pharma & Healthcare Monitor Worldwide
August 22, 2023 Tuesday

 Copyright 2023 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 231 words
Body




Alembic Pharmaceuticals and Aurobindo Pharma are recalling different products in the US market due to manufacturing lapses, according to the US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA). As per the US health regulator's latest Enforcement Report, the US-based subsidiary of Alembic Pharmaceuticals is recalling 82,400 bottles of Tobramycin Ophthalmic Solution in the American market.
Tobramycin Ophthalmic Solution is used to treat bacterial infections of the eye.
New Jersey-based Alembic Pharmaceuticals Inc is recalling the affected lot (0.3 per cent, 5ml bottle) due to "Failed Impurities/Degradation Specifications," USFDA stated.
The company initiated the Class III voluntary recall on July 27 this year.
As per USFDA, a Class III recall is initiated in a "situation in which use of, or exposure to, a violative product is not likely to cause adverse health consequences".
Also, the US-based arm of Aurobindo Pharma is recalling 48 bottles of Rufinamide Tablets, (200 mg, packaged in 120-count bottle), due to cGMP (current good manufacturing practice) deviations, USFDA said.
The batch was released prior to approval.
Aurobindo Pharma USA Inc is also recalling 48 bottles of the same medication in different strengths (USP 400 mg) for similar reasons, it added.
The company initiated the Class II nationwide (US) recall on July 21 this year.
Rufinamide tablets are used to treat seizure disorders.
 Load-Date: August 22, 2023

 

End of Document


Sun Pharma, Hetero recall drugs in the US market
Dion Global Solutions Limited
April 24, 2023 Monday

 Copyright 2023 Dion Global Solutions Limited All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 370 words
Dateline: India 
Body




India, April 24 -- Drug makers Sun Pharma and Hetero are recalling products in the US market for manufacturing issues, according to the US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA).
As per the US health regulator's latest Enforcement Report, the US-based arm of Sun Pharmaceutical Industries is recalling a generic drug indicated to raise blood pressure in adult patients with acute hypotension.
Princeton (New Jersey) based Sun Pharmaceutical Inc is recalling 16,450 vials of Norepinephrine Bitartrate Injection for "Failed Impurities/Degradation Specifications", it said.
The affected lot has been manufactured by Hyderabad-based Gland Pharma and distributed in the US by Sun Pharmaceutical Industries, the USFDA stated. Sun Pharmaceutical Inc initiated the Class III nationwide recall (US) on March 29 this year.
As per the USFDA, a Class III recall is initiated in a "situation in which use of, or exposure to, a violative product is not likely to cause adverse health consequences".
In a separate disclosure, the USFDA said the US-based arm of Hetero Labs is recalling a drug used to treat certain stomach and esophagus problems.
Hetero USA Inc is recalling 2,352 bottles of Pantoprazole Sodium delayed release tablets for "CGMP Deviations: Discoloration", the USFDA stated.
The affected lot was produced by Hetero Labs for New Jersey-based Camber Pharmaceuticals Inc, it added.
Hetero USA Inc initiated the Class II recall on March 14 this year.
As per the USFDA, a Class II recall is initiated in a situation in which use of, or exposure to, a violative product may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences or where the probability of serious adverse health consequences is remote.
The Indian pharmaceutical industry is the world's third-largest by volume and 14th-largest in terms of value. India exported pharmaceuticals worth Rs 1,75,040 crore in the financial year 2021-22, including bulk drugs/ drug intermediates.
The US is the world's largest market for pharmaceutical products.
Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Dion Global Solutions Limited. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
 Load-Date: April 24, 2023

 

End of Document


Anxiety drug recalled over 'life-threatening' label mistake
FOX - 8 WJW (Cleveland, Ohio)
November 23, 2024 Saturday

 Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2024 WJW 
Section: NEWS
Length: 293 words
Byline: Danielle Langenfeld
Body




(WJW) -- A popular anxiety drug is being recalled over a 'life-threatening' label mistake.
In a recall alert for some lots of Clonazepam Orally Disintegrating Tablets the FDA states the medication is mislabeled with the incorrect strength on the carton and as a result, could be life-threatening for some patients. 
According to the Cleveland Clinic, Clonazepam tablets treat seizures and can also be used to treat panic disorder. 
In a press release dated Nov. 18, Endo, Inc. stated the company was expanding its previously announced voluntary recall of the items of concern. 
The company released the following risk statement: 
Children and adults who inadvertently consume a higher dose of clonazepam could be at increased risk for the adverse events of significant sedation, confusion, dizziness, diminished reflexes, ataxia, and hypotonia. There is reasonable probability for significant, possibly life-threatening, respiratory depression especially for patients with concomitant pulmonary disease, patients who have prescribed dosing near maximal dosing, and patients also taking other medications that could cause additional respiratory depression. 
Endo, Inc. 
The company said the labeling error was made by a third-party packager. Endo notes in the recall announcement that the blister strips and tablets inside the product pack reflects the correct strength for the lot. 
So far, the company states they have not received any reports of adverse events associated with the recalled products which were distributed to retail pharmacies nationwide. 
Patients are advised to stop using the recalled medication and if a patient inadvertently took an incorrect dose they are advised to contact a doctor. 
CLICK HERE to view the lot numbers impacted by the recall.
 Load-Date: November 24, 2024

 

End of Document


FDA Recalls Drug Distributed in Puerto Rico
CE Noticias Financieras English
May 24, 2023 Wednesday

 Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved
Length: 360 words
Body




The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) on Tuesday alerted consumers not to use and return lot D20911 Exp 10/25 of G-Supress DX pediatric drops with carza flavor, which was only distributed in pharmacies on the island, as they may contain the wrong product.
According to the FDA, Novis received multiple complaints from pharmacies that found the wrong product, Finafta anesthetic/analgesic liquid, inside the cardboard packaging of the G-Supress product. Novis does not manufacture Finafta anesthetic/analgesic liquid, which is used to temporarily relieve mouth irritation and inflammation. Finafta anesthetic/analgesic liquid comes in 0.5 fl oz (15 ml) bottles.
"Finafta Anesthetic/Analgesic Fluid contains 60% ethyl alcohol and 5% benzocaine. Infants and young children are at increased risk of developing alcohol toxicity, profound hypoglycemia (low blood sugar), coma, hypothermia (low body temperature) or death from ingesting even relatively small amounts of ethanol. Benzocaine can cause methemoglobinemia, a potentially life-threatening condition in which cells receive too little oxygen," the FDA cautioned
"Novis issued a voluntary recall of lot D20911 Exp 10/25 of G-Supress DX Pediatric Drops Cough Suppressant Expectorant Nasal Decongestant, cherry flavored. Consumers, distributors and retailers should discontinue use of this lot and return it to the place of purchase. The product was only distributed in Puerto Rico. To date, Novis has not received any reports of adverse events or injuries related to the use of the product," he said.
Novis PR LLC is notifying its distributors and customers via email and phone calls and arranging for the return of the recalled lot.
Consumers with questions about this recall can contact Novis PR LLC at 787-767-2072 Monday through Friday from 8:00 am to 4:00 pm EST.
Consumers should contact their physician or health care professionals if they have experienced any problems that may be related to the ingestion or use of this drug.
FDA encourages health care professionals and consumers to report adverse events or quality problems with this or any other drug to FDA's MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program.
 Load-Date: May 25, 2023

 

End of Document


Anxiety drug recalled over 'life-threatening' label mistake
FOX - 8 WJW (Cleveland, Ohio)
November 21, 2024 Thursday

 Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2024 WJW 
Section: NEWS
Length: 292 words
Byline: Danielle Langenfeld
Body




(WJW) - A popular anxiety drug is being recalled over a 'life-threatening' label mistake.
In a recall alert for some lots of Clonazepam Orally Disintegrating Tablets the FDA states the medication is mislabeled with the incorrect strength on the carton and as a result, could be life-threatening for some patients. 
According to the Cleveland Clinic, Clonazepam tablets treat seizures and can also be used to treat panic disorder. 
In a press release dated Nov. 18, Endo, Inc. stated the company was expanding its previously announced voluntary recall of the items of concern. 
The company released the following risk statement: 
Children and adults who inadvertently consume a higher dose of clonazepam could be at increased risk for the adverse events of significant sedation, confusion, dizziness, diminished reflexes, ataxia, and hypotonia. There is reasonable probability for significant, possibly life-threatening, respiratory depression especially for patients with concomitant pulmonary disease, patients who have prescribed dosing near maximal dosing, and patients also taking other medications that could cause additional respiratory depression. 
Endo, Inc. 
The company said the labeling error was made by a third-party packager. Endo notes in the recall announcement that the blister strips and tablets inside the product pack reflects the correct strength for the lot. 
So far, the company states they have not received any reports of adverse events associated with the recalled products which were distributed to retail pharmacies nationwide. 
Patients are advised to stop using the recalled medication and if a patient inadvertently took an incorrect dose they are advised to contact a doctor. 
CLICK HERE to view the lot numbers impacted by the recall.
 Load-Date: November 22, 2024

 

End of Document


KVK-Tech Recalls Hypertension Drug Betaxolol Tablets
RTT News (United States)
October 4, 2023 Wednesday

 Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 RTT News All Rights Reserved
Length: 448 words
Byline: editorial@rttnews.com,  (RTT Staff Writer)
Body




       KVK-Tech, Inc. is recalling one lot of hypertension drug Betaxolol Tablets, USP 10 mg citing the potential presence of Oxycodone HCl tablet, an opioid pain medication, according to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
 The recall involves Betaxolol Tablets with Batch Number: 17853A packaged in 50 CC White High-Density Polyethylene or HDPE bottles. The affected Betaxolol Tablets has labeled expiration as June 2027.
 The White, Round, film coated biconvex tablets have debossed "K" above bisect, "13" on one side and plain on the other side. The recalled batch was distributed nationwide to wholesalers and retailers.
 There are minor differences in appearance between betaxolol 10 mg tablets and oxycodone 5 mg tablets.
 The recall was initiated as a precautionary measure after finding a single Oxycodone HCl tablet 5 mg, a foreign tablet, on the packaging line during the line clearance after the affected batch was packaged.
 However, Newtown, Pennsylvania -based KVK has not received any reports of foreign tablet in any bottle of Betaxolol Tablets, USP 10 mg at this time.
 The agency noted that betaxolol package insert warns about slowing in the heart rate in elderly patients which is likely to be exacerbated by inadvertent opioid administration. Some patients prescribed low-dose betaxolol might be have compromised heart and lung function that is also likely to be exacerbated by an opioid.
 The FDA said, "Specific patient populations such as those with opioid use disorder (OUD) or at risk of OUD, infants, children, and the elderly are likely to be negatively affected by inadvertently receiving an opioid, especially if a substantial number of oxycodone tablets have been introduced into a bottle labeled as betaxolol. Therefore, inadvertent exposure to a controlled substance, such as oxycodone, in that patient population is likely to result in significant slowing in breathing, known as respiratory depression, which is a serious health risk."
 Consumers that may have received Betaxolol Tablets Batch Number: 17853A are urged to stop using the drug and immediately return the product to KVK-Tech for reimbursement.
 In similar recalls, Scynexis Inc., which is in exclusive license deal with GSK plc for antifungal drug Brexafemme (ibrexafungerp tablets), last week said it is recalling the drug from the market and placing a temporary hold on clinical studies of ibrexafungerp, citing cross contamination concerns.
 In late July, Baltimore, Maryland-based Lupin Pharmaceuticals, Inc. recalled 2 lots of Tydemy oral contraceptive citing out of specification or OOS test results at the 12-month stability time point.
 For More Such Health News, visit rttnews.com        
 Load-Date: October 5, 2023

 

End of Document


Pakistan recalls drug suspected of causing blindness in diabetes patients
CE Noticias Financieras English
September 24, 2023 Sunday

 Copyright 2023 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved
Length: 239 words
Body




       Pakistani Health Minister Nadim Yan today announced the withdrawal from the market of the injected drug Avastin, which reportedly caused blindness in 14 to 20 diabetes patients in the Pakistani province of Punjab. Other patients suffered varying degrees of vision loss. The drug, manufactured in Pakistan under an international pharmaceutical brand, was administered in hospitals in Lahore, Kasur and Jhang districts to patients with retinal damage caused by diabetes. But the result was aggravation of the infection and loss of eyesight. "Charges have already been filed against the providers, two men, and a legal investigation has been opened," the health minister explained, quoted by the Europa Press news agency. In addition, Yan announced that health care will be provided to those affected, reported Pakistani daily Dawn. Punjab Primary and Secondary Care Minister Yamal Nasir said that the drug generated significant economic benefits for the manufacturers, whom he identified as Navid and Hafiz Bilal, who were wanted. Nasir reported that a committee of experts was formed at the provincial level to investigate what happened. A doctor at Sharif Hospital, Asim Gill, who provided these injections, said that three to four injections were given per patient to reverse the eye damage caused by diabetes. However, several patients lost their sight, although three of them were able to recover it after surgery. (Télam)       
 Load-Date: September 25, 2023

 

End of Document


Litigation over recalled drug weighs on GSK, Haleon and Sanofi stocks
Cityam.com
August 11, 2022 Thursday 2:04 PM GMT

 Copyright 2022 City A.M. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 280 words
Byline: Millie Turner
Highlight: UK pharmaceutical stocks GSK, Haleon and Sanofi have been dragged into the red today – losing billions in market value – ahead of a litigation around recalled heartburn drug Zantac. GSK’s shares have fallen more nearly nine per cent, its newly listed spinoff firm Haleon sunk as much as seven per cent and Paris-based Sanofi [...]The post Litigation over recalled drug weighs on GSK, Haleon and Sanofi stocks appeared first on CityAM.
Body




UK pharmaceutical stocks GSK, Haleon and Sanofi have been dragged into the red today – losing billions in market value – ahead of a litigation around recalled heartburn drug Zantac.
GSK’s shares have fallen more nearly nine per cent, its newly listed spinoff firm Haleon sunk as much as seven per cent and Paris-based Sanofi has declined as much as 13 per cent so far today.
The drug was recalled in 2019, following claims by the US Food and Drug Administration that it produces unacceptable levels of cancer-causing chemicals when exposed to heat.
The case, which will first be heard in Illinois, the US on 22 August, is expected to be headed to several other courts early next year.
Deutsche Bank analyst Emmanuel Papadakis warned today that the litigation will weigh on GSK and Sanofi shares in the short-term.
Healthcare analyst at pharma data analysis firm Citeline, Ellie Davenport, told City A.M. that there remains “considerable uncertainty” around the financial impact of the Zantac litigation.
“The ongoing Zantac woes are likely to act as a near-term headwind for both GSK and Sanofi, as key trials scheduled for the second half of 2022 and beyond could see in damage liabilities reaching into the tens of billions,” she said.
“GSK’s recent consumer healthcare spin-off, Haleon, is expected to have limited involvement, although the company has indemnification obligations to GSK and Pfizer.”
                     City A.M. has contacted GSK, Haleon, Sanofi and Pfizer for comment.
Read more
Haleon cautions lower margins as it navigates the market as a standalone business
The post Litigation over recalled drug weighs on GSK, Haleon and Sanofi stocks  appeared first on CityAM. 
 Load-Date: August 11, 2022

 

End of Document


Zenzedi, ADHD drug recalled for pill mix-ups
CE Noticias Financieras English
January 30, 2024 Tuesday

 Copyright 2024 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2024 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved
Length: 269 words
Body




TUESDAY, Jan. 30, 2024 (HealthDay News) -- The manufacturer of a drug used to treat ADHD and narcolepsy has recalled a batch of the drug after a jumble of tablets was discovered.
The recall notice , issued by Azurity Pharmaceuticals Inc, states that a lot of 30-milligram tablets of Zenzedi is being recalled after a pharmacist found antihistamine tablets in a bottle labeled Zenzedi.
The active compound in Zenzedi is dextroamphetamine sulfate, a stimulant used for the treatment of narcolepsy and ADHD. Meanwhile, the allergy medication found in the mislabeled bottles contains the sedative carbinoxamine, which has the opposite effect of a stimulant.
The recall comes amid an ongoing national shortage of ADHD medications, creating more frustration for people with ADHD who have had difficulty finding medications for their condition, CNN reported .
The recall notice said people who take carbinoxamine instead of Zenzedi have an increased risk of accidents or injury and may have drowsiness, increased eye pressure, urinary obstruction and thyroid disorder. The recalled lot has lot number F230169A and an expiration date of June 2025.
Azurity added that it has not received any reports of serious injuries related to the drug mix-up.
Consumers who have the recalled drug should return it to their pharmacy and call their physician if they have any adverse reactions to the drug.
Problems can also be reported to the FDA's MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program.
More information about Zenzodiazepine
Drugs.com for more information on Zenzedi.
SOURCE: U.S. Food and Drug Administration, recall notice, January 25, 2024.
 Load-Date: January 31, 2024

 

End of Document


Anxiety drug Clonazepam recalled for mislabeling; could cause a 'life-threatening' event
USA Today Online
November 23, 2024 7:26 PM EST

 Copyright 2024 Gannett Media Corp  All Rights Reserved
Length: 760 words
Body




An anxiety drug is being voluntarily recalled over an error that could be “life-threatening”.
Endo, Inc. issued a voluntary recall for Clonazepam tablets “due to potential product carton strength mislabeling.” In the Food and Drug Administration’s (FDA)  recall alert posted on Nov. 19, the pharmaceutical company is investigating and expanding its previously announced voluntary recall of Clonazepam. The Pennsylvania-based company issued the first recall on July 16.  
Link to Image
“Endo’s ongoing investigation has identified the possibility that the Clonazepam product lots listed below contain a limited number of cartons printed with the incorrect strength and National Drug Code (NDC) code due to an error by a third-party packager,” the FDA’s alert said.  
“The blister strips and tablets inside the product pack reflect the correct strength for the lot,” the alert said.  
As of Nov. 18, when Endo, Inc. issued its recall, the company did not receive any reports of adverse events related to the recall.  
An Endo, Inc. spokesperson provided a statement about the recall. 
"Our first priority at Endo is the quality and safety of our products and well-being of patients," Linda Huss said in a statement to USA TODAY. "Our own quality investigation identified a potential label inaccuracy at a third-party vendor, leading to this expanded recall of to a limited number of product lots that were packaged earlier this year." 
"We communicated transparently to our customers and the FDA, which has concluded its review of the issue and our response, and have resolved this issue," Huss added. 
Here is what you need to know about the Clonazepam recall. 
Recall: Ready-to-eat meat, poultry recalled over listeria risk; 11 infections, 1 death
What is Clonazepam?  
Clonazepam, known by its brand name Klonopin, is a popular drug that is used to treat some brain and mental disorders.  
The oral medication is commonly used to provide “a calming effect on the brain and nerves, which helps to reduce anxiety, prevent seizures, and promote relaxation”, WebMD explains.  
What types of Clonazepam are being recalled?   
According to Endo, Inc’s recall, the Clonazepam that is being voluntarily recalled is the product packaged in cartons containing 60 tablets that are packed into 10 blister strips and contain six tablets. 
Link to Image
In photos provided by Pennsylvania-based company it shows the potential mislabeling of a package of the Clonazepam tablets, USP 2 mg lot 550176501 with a carton description and NDC code of Clonazepam tablets, USP 1 mg 60-count.  
Recalled Clonazepam: See list of lot numbers
Can't see the table? Click here to view it. 
What are the risk factors of the recalled drug?  
Endo, Inc. issued the following risk statement in the recall: 
“Children and adults who inadvertently consume a higher dose of clonazepam could be at increased risk for the adverse events of significant sedation, confusion, dizziness, diminished reflexes, ataxia, and hypotonia,” the company said.  
In addition, the company warns of the possible side effects for specific patients.  
“There is reasonable probability for significant, possibly life-threatening, respiratory depression especially for patients with concomitant pulmonary disease, patients who have prescribed dosing near maximal dosing, and patients also taking other medications that could cause additional respiratory depression,” the company said.  
What should you do if you have the recalled drug? 
The pharmaceutical company said the following precautionary measures should be taken if you have any of the recalled Clonazepam:  
•	Distributors and retailers should stop dispensing the recalled product. It is highly recommended that the product be returned to the place of purchase or to contact Inmar.  
•	Consumers are encouraged to discontinue using the drug. 
•	If you are a consumer that may have taken an incorrect dose of Clonazepam it is advised to contact your doctor.  
For all questions regarding this recall, you can contact Inmar at 877-890-0765 on Monday through Friday from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. ET or by email at rxrecalls@inmar.com. 
This article has been updated to add new information. 
Ahjané Forbes is a reporter on the National Trending Team at USA TODAY. Ahjané covers breaking news, car recalls, crime, food recalls, health, lottery, and public policy stories. Email her at aforbes@gannett.com. Follow her on Instagram, Threads and X (Twitter) @forbesfineest. 
This article originally appeared on USA TODAY: Anxiety drug Clonazepam recalled for mislabeling; could cause a 'life-threatening' event
 Load-Date: November 25, 2024

 

End of Document


Viona Pharmaceuticals Recalls Diabetes Drug Metformin
CE Noticias Financieras English
June 14, 2021 Monday

 Copyright 2021 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2021 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved
Length: 345 words
Body




       Viona Pharmaceuticals Inc. has recalled type 2 diabetes drug Metformin in the form of oral film-coated tablets for the potential presence of nitrosamine impurity, N-Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), above levels of the Acceptable Daily Intake Limit (ADI), the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or FDA said in a statement.
 The recall involves 2 lots each of Metformin HCl Extended Release tablets USP 750 mg. The product is indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve blood glucose control in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus. These are packaged in HDPE bottles of 100 tablets.
 The affected Metformin 750 mg tablets are with expiry date of October 2021. These drugs were distributed across the U.S. to wholesalers. They were manufactured by Ahmedabad, India-based Cadila Healthcare Ltd. in November 2019, for U.S. distribution by Viona Pharmaceuticals.
 NDMA, a known environmental contaminant, is classified as a probable human carcinogen, a substance that could cause cancer. It is generally found in water and foods, including meats, dairy products, and vegetables.
 The company said it has not received any reports of adverse events related to this recall to date.
 Patients who have received impacted lots of Metformin are advised to continue taking their medication and contact their physician for advice regarding an alternative treatment. The company is arranging for return of all recalled products to its recall processor Eversana Life Science Services.
 The FDA began testing Metformin in the U.S. supply after it become aware of NDMA in some Metformin products in other countries in late 2019. The FDA later urged many drug companies that manufacture Metformin to implement the drug's recall due to NDMA impurity.
 In January, Nostrum Laboratories, Inc. recalled one lot of Metformin Hydrochloride, in September last year, India-based Sun Pharmaceutical Industries, Inc. recalled one lot of type 2 diabetes medication RIOMET ER (metformin), and in July last year, India-based Lupin Pharmaceuticals Inc. called back all batches of Metformin.        
 Load-Date: June 15, 2021

 

End of Document


Viona Pharmaceuticals Recalls Diabetes Drug Metformin
dpa-AFX International ProFeed
June 14, 2021 Monday 4:26 PM GMT

 Copyright 2021 dpa-AFX Wirtschaftsnachrichten GmbH All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 350 words
Body




       WASHINGTON (dpa-AFX) - Viona Pharmaceuticals Inc. has recalled type 2 diabetes drug Metformin in the form of oral film-coated tablets for the potential presence of nitrosamine impurity, N-Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), above levels of the Acceptable Daily Intake Limit (ADI), the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or FDA said in a statement.  The recall involves 2 lots each of Metformin HCl Extended Release tablets USP 750 mg. The product is indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve blood glucose control in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus. These are packaged in HDPE bottles of 100 tablets.  The affected Metformin 750 mg tablets are with expiry date of October 2021. These drugs were distributed across the U.S. to wholesalers. They were manufactured by Ahmedabad, India-based Cadila Healthcare Ltd. in November 2019, for U.S. distribution by Viona Pharmaceuticals.  NDMA, a known environmental contaminant, is classified as a probable human carcinogen, a substance that could cause cancer. It is generally found in water and foods, including meats, dairy products, and vegetables.  The company said it has not received any reports of adverse events related to this recall to date.  Patients who have received impacted lots of Metformin are advised to continue taking their medication and contact their physician for advice regarding an alternative treatment. The company is arranging for return of all recalled products to its recall processor Eversana Life Science Services.  The FDA began testing Metformin in the U.S. supply after it become aware of NDMA in some Metformin products in other countries in late 2019. The FDA later urged many drug companies that manufacture Metformin to implement the drug's recall due to NDMA impurity.  In January, Nostrum Laboratories, Inc. recalled one lot of Metformin Hydrochloride, in September last year, India-based Sun Pharmaceutical Industries, Inc. recalled one lot of type 2 diabetes medication RIOMET ER (metformin), and in July last year, India-based Lupin Pharmaceuticals Inc. called back all batches of Metformin.      
 Load-Date: June 14, 2021

 

End of Document


Viona Pharmaceuticals Recalls Diabetes Drug Metformin
RTT News (United States)
June 14, 2021 Monday

 Copyright 2021 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2021 RTT News All Rights Reserved
Length: 345 words
Byline: editorial@rttnews.com,  (RTT Staff Writer)
Body




       Viona Pharmaceuticals Inc. has recalled type 2 diabetes drug Metformin in the form of oral film-coated tablets for the potential presence of nitrosamine impurity, N-Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), above levels of the Acceptable Daily Intake Limit (ADI), the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or FDA said in a statement.
 The recall involves 2 lots each of Metformin HCl Extended Release tablets USP 750 mg. The product is indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve blood glucose control in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus. These are packaged in HDPE bottles of 100 tablets.
 The affected Metformin 750 mg tablets are with expiry date of October 2021. These drugs were distributed across the U.S. to wholesalers. They were manufactured by Ahmedabad, India-based Cadila Healthcare Ltd. in November 2019, for U.S. distribution by Viona Pharmaceuticals.
 NDMA, a known environmental contaminant, is classified as a probable human carcinogen, a substance that could cause cancer. It is generally found in water and foods, including meats, dairy products, and vegetables.
 The company said it has not received any reports of adverse events related to this recall to date.
 Patients who have received impacted lots of Metformin are advised to continue taking their medication and contact their physician for advice regarding an alternative treatment. The company is arranging for return of all recalled products to its recall processor Eversana Life Science Services.
 The FDA began testing Metformin in the U.S. supply after it become aware of NDMA in some Metformin products in other countries in late 2019. The FDA later urged many drug companies that manufacture Metformin to implement the drug's recall due to NDMA impurity.
 In January, Nostrum Laboratories, Inc. recalled one lot of Metformin Hydrochloride, in September last year, India-based Sun Pharmaceutical Industries, Inc. recalled one lot of type 2 diabetes medication RIOMET ER (metformin), and in July last year, India-based Lupin Pharmaceuticals Inc. called back all batches of Metformin.        
 Load-Date: June 15, 2021

 

End of Document


Eisai Settles Recalled Diet Drug Cancer Claims
Law360 Legal News - Corporate
February 1, 2023 Wednesday

 Copyright 2023 Portfolio Media, Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Section: CLASS ACTION, FLORIDA, HEALTH, LIFE SCIENCES, PRODUCT LIABILITY
Length: 398 words
Byline: Collin Krabbe
Highlight: Eisai Inc. and Arena Pharmaceuticals Inc. have agreed to settle a suit with a woman who alleged the companies' recalled diet drug Belviq caused her breast cancer, asking the Middle District of Florida for a three-month stay while the agreement is completed.
Body




Eisai Inc. and Arena Pharmaceuticals Inc. have agreed to settle a suit with a woman who alleged the companies' recalled diet drug Belviq caused her breast cancer, asking the Middle District of Florida for a three-month stay while the agreement is completed.

 A federal judge previously said Colleen Scala, who was diagnosed with breast cancer in May 2017, had plausibly pleaded that Belviq was "unreasonably dangerous" because of an active ingredient called lorcaserin, which has been linked to increased instances of tumors in rats. And while her design-defect claims were allowed to move forward, a joint status report filed Tuesday shows the spat has been settled.

 The report says the parties have "reached an agreement" to settle more than one Belviq case, including Scala's. The parties did not immediately return requests for comment on Wednesday.

 Scala, Eisai and Arena each requested that the court stay all deadlines in the litigation for another 90 days, "so the settlement can be concluded and the case can be dismissed with prejudice."

 In December 2021, U.S. District Judge Anne C. Conway trimmed Scala's suit, dismissing claims of fraudulent misrepresentation. Scala needed to highlight more than just a television commercial for Belviq that failed to mention cancer as a side effect in pleading that the companies engaged in negligent misrepresentation, the judge said.

 Arena won approval for the drug in 2012, and Eisai acquired it in 2016. In her complaint, Scala pointed to preclinical trial studies done by the companies that identified lorcaserin as a possible carcinogen.

 And in Judge Conway's previous order trimming the litigation, she wrote that "the facts in the complaint plausibly show that Belviq was unreasonably dangerous because its active ingredient - lorcaserin - had a propensity to cause cancer."

 Scala was represented by David P. Dearing, W. Roger Smith III, Ryan J. Duplechin and Mary C. Raybon of Beasley Allen Crow Methvin Portis & Miles PC.

 Eisai was represented by Anitra Raiford Clement and Brian T. Guthrie of Shook Hardy & Bacon LLP.

 Arena was represented by David J. Walz and Caycee D. Hampton of Carlton Fields PA.

 The case is Scala v. Eisai Inc. et al., case number 5:21-cv-00210, in the U.S. District Court for the Middle District of Florida, Ocala Division.

 --Additional reporting from Jonathan Capriel. Editing by Melissa Treolo.
Link to PDF
 Load-Date: February 12, 2023

 

End of Document


ADHD Drug Recall as Mislabeled Package Sparks Warning
Newsweek.com
January 26, 2024 Friday 11:23 AM EST

 Copyright © 2024 Newsweek Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 496 words
Byline: Rachel Dobkin
Highlight: Azurity Pharmaceuticals, Inc. announced the recall of Zenzedi CII 30 milligrams on Wednesday.
Body




Zenzedi, an attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) drug, has been recalled after a mislabeled package sparked a warning for prescribers of the medication.
Azurity Pharmaceuticals, Inc. announced the recall of one lot (F230169A) of Zenzedi CII (dextroamphetamine sulfate tablets, USP) 30 milligrams on Wednesday, which the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) put on its website on Thursday. The recalled lot was shipped to wholesalers from August 23, 2023, to November 29, 2023.
In the announcement, Azurity Pharmaceuticals said that a pharmacist in Nebraska reported opening a bottle of Zenzedi only to find tablets of Carbinoxamine Maleate, which is an antihistamine drug. Following the report, the drug manufacturer opened a product complaint, which was proceeded by an investigation.
Zenzedi 30 mg tablets are light yellow and shaped like a hexagon. It has the number 30 on one side and the letters MIA on the other side. Meanwhile, Carbinoxamine Maleate tablets USP, 4 mg, which were found by the pharmacist, are white and round, with the number 211 on one side and the letters GL on the other.
In addition to ADHD, Zenzedi is used to treat narcolepsy, a sleeping disorder. Azurity Pharmaceuticals warned in its release that "patients who take carbinoxamine instead of Zenzedi will experience undertreatment of their symptoms, which may result in functional impairment and an increased risk of accidents or injury."
It also warned that for ADHD and narcolepsy patients "there is a reasonable probability that accidents or injuries that occur due to the sedating effects of carbinoxamine, could lead to ongoing disability or death in severe cases..."
The pharmaceuticals company listed the following adverse events that patients who unknowingly took carbinoxamine may experience:
•	DrowsinessSleepinessCentral nervous system (CNS) depressionIncreased eye pressureEnlarged prostate urinary obstructionThyroid disorder
Newsweek reached out to Azurity Pharmaceuticals via telephone for comment.
Meanwhile, Azurity Pharmaceuticals reassured its consumers that there has yet to be any reports of "serious adverse events" involving the drug recall.
The company warned consumers who have the recalled drug to stop using it and return it to where they purchased it from. Additionally, it said that "consumers should contact their physician or healthcare provider if they have experienced any problems that may be related to taking or using this drug product."
Those who experience an adverse event can contact Azurity Pharmaceuticals and the FDA's MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program. Quality problems may also be reported to the FDA's program. To contact the FDA's program, call 1-800-332-1088 or go to www.fda.gov/medwatch/report.htm.
Azurity Pharmaceuticals notified wholesale distributors of the recall on January 4. The company said in its release that it "is working with wholesalers and retailers to arrange for the return and replacement of recalled product."
Link to Image
 Graphic



 
Pills
George Frey/AFP via Getty Images
Bottle of pills sit on shelves at Rock Canyon Pharmacy in Provo, Utah on May 20, 2020.
 Load-Date: January 26, 2024

 

End of Document


Camber recalls pneumonia drug, citing possible microbial contamination
Indian Pharma Industry : Policies
April 12, 2023 Wednesday

 Copyright 2023 Indian Pharma Industry All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 217 words
Dateline: New Delhi 
Body




 April 12 -- Camber Pharmaceuticals issued a voluntary recall of one lot of atovaquone oral suspension used to treat a form of pneumonia. The recall is due to the potential of microbial contamination of Bacillus cereus.
 
 
In a filing posted on the FDA's website, the company said the recall covers lot #E220182 of atovaquone, USP 750mg/5mL, at the consumer level. The drugs were packaged in 210 milliliter HDPE bottles with an expiration date of December 2023. The recalled lot was distributed to wholesalers, distributors, retail pharmacies and mail-order pharmacies nationwide.
The company said that, to date, it has not received any reports of adverse effects related to the recall.
Atovaquone is typically used to prevent and treat pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia in adults and children 13 years and older who cannot tolerate other medicines such as trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
Those most at risk for such a microbial contamination are immunocompromised patients. The contamination of B. cereus can cause life threatening infections such as endocarditis and necrotizing soft tissue infections.
 New Jersey-based Camber was in the news last October after it joined the ranks of other drugmakers in reporting Adderall supply problems. That drug is used to treat attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
 Load-Date: April 12, 2023

 

End of Document


Accel , Mint and Pharmascience recall some drugs over efficacy test data concerns
CBC (News)
June 8, 2024 Saturday 6:27 PM EST

 Copyright 2024 CBC/Radio-Canada.  All Rights Reserved
 
Section: PHARMA INDUSTRY NEWS
Length: 251 words
Body




Three pharmaceutical companies are recalling various tablets due to concerns about the tests used to demonstrate their efficacy, Health Canada announced.
Accel Pharma, Mint Pharmaceuticals and Pharmascience are recalling the following:
Health Canada says the move comes from concerns over bioequivalence test data, which is used to show that a pharma company's generic prescription drug works the same as the brand-name counterpart.
Specifically, the agency says the tests for the three companies were conducted by India-based Synapse Labs, which the European Medicines Agency (EMA) determined could not be relied upon.
"The affected products can no longer be considered safe and effective," Health Canada said.
"At Health Canada's request, the companies have stopped sale and have recalled all lots of the affected products until they can provide additional information to demonstrate that the products are safe and effective."
The EMA said in December 2023 that inspections of Synapse found "irregularities in study data and inadequacies in study documentation and in the computer systems and procedures to manage study data."
Accel and Pharmascience are pharma companies based in Quebec, while Mint is based in Ontario.
Ondansetron is used to treat nausea and side effects from cancer chemotherapy, radiation therapy and surgery; betahistine is an anti-vertigo medication used to treat symptoms of Ménière's disease; and pirfenidone is an anti-inflammatory and antioxidant medication to treat pulmonary fibrosis.
 Load-Date: June 8, 2024

 

End of Document


Davina McCall recalls drug overdose
Newstex Blogs 
BANG ShowBiz
March 8, 2020 Sunday 10:30 AM EST

 Copyright 2020 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 341 words
Body




Mar 08, 2020( BANG ShowBiz: http://www.bangshowbiz.com Delivered by Newstex)  Davina McCall was rushed to hospital following a drugs overdose in her 20s.The 52-year-old presenter - who has spoken openly about her battle with heroin addiction in the past - knew she needed to "get clean or die" when she reached her lowest point after turning to narcotics to try to "escape" from herself.Speaking to a group of teenage girls at the launch of The Sun on Sunday newspaper's International Women's Day event, she said: "Drugs took me to a very, very, very dark place and, one night, I overdosed."It was very frightening as it was a very gradual overdose. I'd had a cocktail of drugs, because I didn't want to feel normal."I was constantly trying to escape myself -- I was like a piece of fruit rotting from the inside."So then I thought, 'Well, I'll just take a valium', and the next thing I knew I woke up in hospital. 
At my lowest point, when I was filled with self hatred, it was literally a case of 'get clean, or die'."After her overdose, Davina turned to Narcotics Anonymous meetings - which she still occasionally attends - and quit drugs within a year, which helped her turn her life around.She said: "I was the person that people would have crossed the street to avoid. I started with cannabis and went on to become a heroin addict."It ended up taking me to the darkest, darkest place. I empowered myself to change my situation, I made a conscious decision I could change me. And because I got clean I got the job I'd dreamed of and that changed my life forever."The former 'Big Brother' presenter learned a lot of valuable "lessons" from the meetings.She continued: "When I went to these meetings I thought, 'It's get clean or die'."In any situation that I go into now, I use the lessons I learned at those meetings"I learned how to work hard... at first on my recovery but later I took with me lessons I'd learned and channelled them into my work."And here I am talking to people and you might want to learn something from what I've said." 
 Load-Date: March 8, 2020

 

End of Document


Camber recalls pneumonia drug, citing possible microbial contamination
FiercePharma Manufacturing
April 4, 2023

 Copyright 2023 Questex Media Group LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: ARTICLE
Length: 215 words
Byline: Joseph Keenan
Highlight: Camber Pharmaceuticals issued a voluntary recall of one lot of atovaquone oral suspension used to treat a form of pneumonia. The recall is due to the potential of microbial contamination of bacillus cereus.
Body




Camber Pharmaceuticals issued a voluntary recall of one lot of atovaquone oral suspension used to treat a form of pneumonia. The recall is due to the potential of microbial contamination of Bacillus cereus.
In a filing posted on the FDA's website, the company said the recall covers lot #E220182 of atovaquone, USP 750mg/5mL, at the consumer level. The drugs were packaged in 210 milliliter HDPE bottles with an expiration date of December 2023. The recalled lot was distributed to wholesalers, distributors, retail pharmacies and mail-order pharmacies nationwide.
The company said that, to date, it has not received any reports of adverse effects related to the recall.
Atovaquone is typically used to prevent and treat pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia in adults and children 13 years and older who cannot tolerate other medicines such as trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
Those most at risk for such a microbial contamination are immunocompromised patients. The contamination of B. cereus can cause life threatening infections such as endocarditis and necrotizing soft tissue infections.
New Jersey-based Camber was in the news last October after it joined the ranks of other drugmakers in reporting Adderall supply problems. That drug is used to treat&nbsp;attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.
 Load-Date: April 6, 2023

 

End of Document


Unichem, Macleods Pharma recall drugs from US market
Pharma & Healthcare Monitor Worldwide
February 17, 2020 Monday

 Copyright 2020 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 293 words
Body




Drug firms Unichem Pharmaceuticals and Macleods Pharma are recalling various lots of tablets used for treatment of high blood pressure and diabetes from the US market, according to a latest enforcement report of the American health regulator.
Unichem Pharmaceuticals USA Inc is recalling 1.91 crore units of Clonidine Hydrochloride tablets used for treating high blood pressure from the US market, the report said.
The company is recalling units of Clonidine Hydrochloride tablets, USP 0.1 mg manufactured by Unichem Laboratories Ltd at Goa facility, it added.
The reason for the voluntary ongoing nationwide is "failed impurities/degredation specifications. This recall is initiated as a precautionary measure due to potential migration of Benzophenone at very low level into product from container label, the United States Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) said.
On the other hand, Macleods Pharma USA Inc is recalling 4,694 bottles of Pioglitazone and Metformin Hydrochloride tablets used to treat high blood sugar levels caused by type 2 diabetes from the US market.
The company is recalling Pioglitazone and Metformin Hydrochloride tablets USP 15 mg/500 mg, manufactured by Macleods Pharmaceuticals Ltd at its Baddi facility in Himachal Pradesh, the report said.
The reason for the voluntary nationwide ongoing recall is on account of it being "subpotent drug: out of specification assay result, below specification, for two lots of Pioglitazone And Metformin Hydrochloride tablets," the USFDA said.
Both the recalls by the companies are class III recalls, it added.
As per the USFDA, a class III recall is initiated in a "situation in which use of, or exposure to, a violative product is not likely to cause adverse health consequences". 2020 Global Data Point.
 Load-Date: February 17, 2020

 

End of Document


Anvisa revokes recall of the drug losartana
CE Noticias Financieras English
July 13, 2022 Wednesday

 Copyright 2022 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2022 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved
Length: 237 words
Body




The National Health Surveillance Agency (Anvisa) will publish resolutions to revoke the recall, interdiction, and prohibition of commercialization of batches of drugs containing the active ingredient losartan, antihypertensive and one of the most used heart failure drugs in Brazil.
The decision comes after new scientific data was received regarding the impurity detected in the active ingredient of the substance. Batches of losartan had been recalled between September and October last year, after a type of azide impurity was found in the product. In June of this year, another determination by Anvisa came back to collect the drug from the shelves
"The evidence showed, from new tests performed, that the azide impurity does not have the toxicity initially identified. Thus, with the new data presented, the safety limits were recalculated, indicating that the batches of the drug that were recalled or banned do not exceed the safety limits," said the agency.
Also according to Anvisa, the impurity azide may arise during the manufacturing process of the active pharmaceutical ingredient losartan. Initially, this impurity was considered to have mutagenic potential, i.e., as a possible cause of changes capable of causing damage to human cells. In light of additional studies, the impurity was reclassified to "non-mutagenic".
 The post Anvisa revokes recall of losartana drug appeared first on ISTOÉ Independente.       
 Load-Date: August 16, 2022

 

End of Document


Eli Lilly Recalls Hypoglycemia Drug
CE Noticias Financieras English
September 29, 2021 Wednesday

 Copyright 2021 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2021 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved
Length: 360 words
Body




Eli Lilly is voluntarily recalling a specific lot of its glucagon emergency kit, R-Glucagon Lilly, due to "loss of potency," meaning it may not treat low blood sugar levels, which can lead to adverse health effects.
Through a statement, the company detailed that it is doing the recall of this lot D239382C at the patient level due to the receipt of a product complaint related to a vial of glucagon atypical appearance, which was in liquid form instead of lyophilized powder. The investigation indicates that the liquid form content in this vial of R-Glucagon Lilly may be related to the manufacturing process.
Glucagon is used as an anti-hypoglycemic agent and gastrointestinal motility inhibitor indicated for the treatment of severe hypoglycemia in pediatric and adult patients with diabetes mellitus.
Severe hypoglycemia in patients with diabetes, if not reversed, can potentially cause adverse health consequences ranging from mild, transient discomfort to neurologic damage, seizures, and even death if not treated immediately. Associated with the product complaint, Lilly was informed that the patient involved experienced a lack of effect of the drug and also reported subsequent seizures.
 Photo Courtesy Eli Lilly 
Eli Lilly said it is "committed to making high-quality medicines for patients who need them, and the safety and quality of our products is our top priority. We take our obligations seriously and have rigorous quality systems in place to ensure compliance with strict regulatory requirements."
Don't forget to follow us on Google News to stay informed.
It noted that it is notifying its customers through written communication and is arranging for the return and replacement of all recalled units. It advised its distributors with an existing inventory of R-Glucagon Lilly Lot D239382C to stop distribution and immediately quarantine it.
Meanwhile, he said, consumers currently in possession of the product: R-Glucagon Lilly, Lot D239382C should stop using it immediately and contact their doctor if they have experienced any problems that may be related to the use of this product.
Follow us on Facebook: La Prensa Oficial and Twitter: @laprensaoem
 Load-Date: September 30, 2021

 

End of Document


Anvisa revokes recall of the drug losartana
CE Noticias Financieras English
July 13, 2022 Wednesday

 Copyright 2022 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2022 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved
Length: 283 words
Body




The National Health Surveillance Agency (Anvisa) will publish resolutions to revoke the recall, interdiction, and prohibition of commercialization of batches of drugs containing the active ingredient losartan, antihypertensive and one of the most used heart failure drugs in Brazil.
The decision comes after new scientific data was received regarding the impurity detected in the active ingredient of the substance. Batches of losartan had been recalled between September and October last year, after a type of azide impurity was found in the product. In June of this year, another Anvisa determination once again recalled the drug from the shelves
"The evidence showed, from new tests performed, that the azide impurity does not have the toxicity initially identified. Thus, with the new data presented, the safety limits were recalculated, indicating that the batches of the drug that were recalled or banned do not exceed the safety limits," said the agency.
Also according to Anvisa, the impurity azide may arise during the manufacturing process of the active pharmaceutical ingredient losartan. Initially, this impurity was considered to have mutagenic potential, i.e., as a possible cause of changes capable of causing damage to human cells. In light of additional studies, the impurity was reclassified to "non-mutagenic".
The documents containing the new scientific data were proactively requested by Anvisa and received under the confidentiality agreement signed with the European Medicines Agency (EMA), after disclosure by the Coordination Group for Mutual Recognition and Decentralised Procedures - Human (CMDh), an agency linked to the EMA, of new information on the azide impurity in losartan.
 Load-Date: August 16, 2022

 

End of Document


Blood Pressure Medication Recall 2021: Hypertension Drug Recalled Over Cancer Risks
Newstex Blogs 
International Business Times News
October 14, 2021 Thursday 6:45 PM EST

 Copyright 2021 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 531 words
Body




Oct 14, 2021( International Business Times News: http://www.ibtimes.com Delivered by Newstex)  
 Inanother recall[1]over cancer-causing impurity levels,Lupin Pharmaceutical[2]has recalled several batches of its Irbesartan tablets and Irbesartan and Hydrochlorothiazide tablets because N-nitrosoirbesartan - a substance that causes cancer - was found in levels above allowable specification limits. 
The drugmaker received four reports of illness from Irbesartan and zero reports from the Irbesartan and Hydrochlorothiazide medication from the dates of Oct. 8, 2018 to Sept. 20, 2021. 
However, Lupin said that it has received no reports of illness that appear related to the recall issue but is recalling the medication 'out of an abundance of caution.' 
The company is recalling all batches of 75 mg, 150 mg, and 300 mg of Irbesartan tablets and 150/12.5 mg and 300 mg/12.5 mg Irbesartan and Hydrochlorothiazide tablets in the U.S. 

Irbesartan is used for the treatment of hypertension, to lower blood pressure, diabetic nephropathy in hypertension patients with Type 2 diabetes, an elevated serum creatinine, and proteinuria. 
The Irbesartan medication was sold in 30 and 90 count bottles and distributed nationwide to drug chains, mail-order pharmacies, supermarkets, and wholesalers. A full list of recalled Irbesartan tablets can be viewed here[3]. 
Irbesartan and Hydrochlorothiazide medication is used to treat hypertension in patients who need multiple drugs to achieve their blood pressure goals or for hypertension management not adequately controlled with monotherapy. 
The affected drug was sold in 30 and 90 count bottles nationwide to drug chains, mail-order pharmacies, supermarkets, and wholesalers. A full list of Irbesartan and Hydrochlorothiazide tablets recalled can be viewed here[4]. 
Patients who are taking the recalled medication are advised to continue taking the Irbesartan and Irbesartan and Hydrochlorothiazide tablets. They should contact their pharmacist or healthcare provider for an alternative treatment option. 
Questions about the recall can be directed to Inmar Rx Solutions Inc. at 1-855-769-3988/1-855-769-3989, Monday through Friday, from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. ET. 
For reimbursement of the affected medication, the recalled lots can be returned to Inmar Rx Solutions, Inc. at 635 Vine St, Winston Salem, NC 27101. The lot number can be found on the side of the bottle label. 
Lupin has discontinued marketing both medications as of Jan. 7, 2021. 
 A representational image of medicine. Photo: Myriams-Fotos, Pixabay 
 [ 1]: https://www.ibtimes.com/chantix-recall-2021-pfizer-expands-recall-stop-smoking-medication-over-cancer-fears-3298165 [ 2]: https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts/lupin-pharmaceuticals-inc-issues-voluntarily-nationwide-recall-all-irbesartan-tablets-and-irbesartan [ 3]: https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts/lupin-pharmaceuticals-inc-issues-voluntarily-nationwide-recall-all-irbesartan-tablets-and-irbesartan [ 4]: https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts/lupin-pharmaceuticals-inc-issues-voluntarily-nationwide-recall-all-irbesartan-tablets-and-irbesartan 
 Load-Date: October 14, 2021

 

End of Document


Teva Recalls Drug Vials, Shuts Facility Over Mold Concerns
TheStreet.com
October 4, 2021 Monday 3:05 PM EDT

 Copyright 2021 TheStreet.com, Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 253 words
Byline: Tony Owusu
Highlight: Teva Pharmaceuticals reportedly recalls more than 2.5 million vials of drugs due to potential contamination.
Body




Teva Pharmaceuticals  shares are falling Monday afternoon after the company announced that it has stopped production at one of its facilities after recalling more than 2.5 million vials of drugs that it says may not be sterile. 
The Israel-based company says the drug vials may have contained mold contamination stemming from water leaks. U.S. inspectors discovered the issue at the company's production plant in Irvine, Calif.
The company has temporarily stopped drug production at the facility and says that it is reviewing the concerns raised by the Food and Drug Administration, according to the company's response to Bloomberg. 
Teva said the plant received an FDA Form 483, which lists the issues that could lead to potential Food and Drug Administration rule violations.
"We have carefully reviewed the 483 and are taking extensive actions to ensure the agency's observations are fully addressed," Teva told Reuters. "As a precautionary measure, we temporarily stopped the manufacture of products from the Irvine facility while we conduct a thorough review."
Shares of Teva were falling 1.5% to $9.56 per share at last check Monday afternoon. 
Earlier this year, Teva reportedly stopped a search for partners to produce a COVID-19 vaccine. 
CEO Kare Schultz had said in February that Teva was in discussions with top-tier shot makers about helping with production and distribution. 
The talks ended after the companies clinched other manufacturing agreements and determined they had sufficient capacity to meet targets.
 Load-Date: October 4, 2021

 

End of Document


Eugia US Recalls Herpes Drug Acyclovir Sodium Injection
CE Noticias Financieras English
September 28, 2022 Wednesday

 Copyright 2022 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2022 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved
Length: 317 words
Body




       Eugia US LLC, formerly AuroMedics Pharma LLC, has initiated a recall of certain AuroMedics Acyclovir Sodium Injection from the U.S. market citing the presence of a dark red, brown and black particulate inside the vial, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration said.
 AuroMedics Acyclovir Sodium Injection contains acyclovir, a synthetic nucleoside analog, active against herpes viruses. The drug is for the treatment of initial and recurrent mucosal and cutaneous herpes simplex (HSV- 1 and HSV-2) in immunocompromised patients and initial clinical episodes of herpes genitalis in immuno-competent patients.
 The recall involves lot number AC22006 of AuroMedics Acyclovir Sodium Injection 500 mg per 10 mL (50 mg/mL), 10 mL single dose vial to the consumer level with an expiration date of 08/2023. It is packaged in a glass vial labeled with NDC 55150-154-10.
 Eugia US shipped the entire lot to wholesalers nationwide from June 8, 2022, through June 13, 2022.
 The recall was initiated following a product complaint for the presence of a dark red, brown and black particulate inside the vial.
 The agency noted that the administration of an intravenous product containing particulates may result in inflammation, allergic reactions, or circulatory system complications that could be life-threatening.
 However, the East Windsor, New Jersey-based company has not received reports of any adverse events or identifiable safety concerns related to the recalled product to date.
 Eugia US is notifying its direct consignees by recall letters and is arranging for return/ replacement of all recalled product. Wholesale customers and health professionals are asked to immediately place the recalled lot on hold.
 Consumers are asked to contact their physician or healthcare provider for any problems likely related to taking or using the affected drug product.
 For More Such Health News, visit rttnews.com        
 Load-Date: September 29, 2022

 

End of Document


Eugia US Recalls Herpes Drug Acyclovir Sodium Injection
RTT News (United States)
September 28, 2022 Wednesday

 Copyright 2022 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2022 RTT News All Rights Reserved
Length: 317 words
Byline: editorial@rttnews.com,  (RTT Staff Writer)
Body




       Eugia US LLC, formerly AuroMedics Pharma LLC, has initiated a recall of certain AuroMedics Acyclovir Sodium Injection from the U.S. market citing the presence of a dark red, brown and black particulate inside the vial, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration said.
 AuroMedics Acyclovir Sodium Injection contains acyclovir, a synthetic nucleoside analog, active against herpes viruses. The drug is for the treatment of initial and recurrent mucosal and cutaneous herpes simplex (HSV- 1 and HSV-2) in immunocompromised patients and initial clinical episodes of herpes genitalis in immuno-competent patients.
 The recall involves lot number AC22006 of AuroMedics Acyclovir Sodium Injection 500 mg per 10 mL (50 mg/mL), 10 mL single dose vial to the consumer level with an expiration date of 08/2023. It is packaged in a glass vial labeled with NDC 55150-154-10.
 Eugia US shipped the entire lot to wholesalers nationwide from June 8, 2022, through June 13, 2022.
 The recall was initiated following a product complaint for the presence of a dark red, brown and black particulate inside the vial.
 The agency noted that the administration of an intravenous product containing particulates may result in inflammation, allergic reactions, or circulatory system complications that could be life-threatening.
 However, the East Windsor, New Jersey-based company has not received reports of any adverse events or identifiable safety concerns related to the recalled product to date.
 Eugia US is notifying its direct consignees by recall letters and is arranging for return/ replacement of all recalled product. Wholesale customers and health professionals are asked to immediately place the recalled lot on hold.
 Consumers are asked to contact their physician or healthcare provider for any problems likely related to taking or using the affected drug product.
 For More Such Health News, visit rttnews.com        
 Load-Date: September 29, 2022

 

End of Document


Pfizer's Hospira recalls 3 drug lots over particulate concerns
Pharma & Healthcare Monitor Worldwide
October 5, 2023 Thursday

 Copyright 2023 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 273 words
Body




Hospira, a unit of Pfizer, issued a voluntary recall of sodium bicarbonate and lidocaine HCI injectables due to the possible presence of glass particles in the vials.
Monday, Hospira said it recalled one lot of 4.2% sodium bicarbonate injection with an August 2024 expiration date. The company also recalled a 1% lidocaine HCI injection lot with a June 2024 expiration date and a 2% lidocaine HCI injection lot with a July 2024 expiration date.
Hospira's notice was posted on the FDA's website.
The products were distributed nationwide and in the U.S. territory of Puerto Rico last October. The company said there have been no reports of adverse events related to the products.
Sodium bicarbonate injection is typically used to treat metabolic acidosis resulting from severe renal disease, uncontrolled diabetes, cardiac arrest or other serious health complications.
Lidocaine HCI injection is used as an anesthetic for patients undergoing certain medical procedures plus acute management of ventricular arrhythmias.
Hospira has weathered its share of manufacturing issues and recalls over the years.
In late 2022, the company recalled one lot of its vancomycin hydrochloride injection vials because of glass particles in the vials. In July the same year, the company recalled one lot of the anesthetic propofol after an employee found a visible particulate in a vial during an annual inspection.
Back in 2017 and 2018, Hospira issued several recalls of injectables due to problems with particulates, microbial growth and a human hair found in a syringe of one lot of 25% dextrose injection for infants.
Pfizer bought Hospira for $17 billion in 2015.
 Load-Date: October 5, 2023

 

End of Document


Pfizer's Hospira recalls 3 drug lots over particulate concerns
FiercePharma Manufacturing
October 3, 2023

 Copyright 2023 Questex Media Group LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: ARTICLE
Length: 278 words
Byline: Joseph Keenan
Highlight: Hospira, a unit of Pfizer, issued a voluntary recall of sodium bicarbonate and lidocaine HCI injectables due to the possible presence of glass particles in the vials.\r
Body




Hospira, a unit of Pfizer, issued a voluntary recall&nbsp;of sodium bicarbonate and lidocaine HCI injectables due to the possible presence of glass particles in the vials.
Monday, Hospira said it recalled one lot of 4.2% sodium bicarbonate injection with an August 2024 expiration date. The company also recalled a 1% lidocaine HCI injection lot with a June 2024 expiration date and a 2% lidocaine HCI injection lot with a July 2024 expiration date.
Hospira's notice was posted on the FDA's website.
The products were distributed nationwide and in the U.S. territory of Puerto Rico last October. The company said there have been no reports of adverse events related to the products.
Sodium bicarbonate injection is typically used to treat metabolic acidosis resulting from severe renal disease, uncontrolled diabetes, cardiac arrest or other serious health complications.
Lidocaine HCI injection is used as an anesthetic for patients undergoing certain medical procedures plus&nbsp;acute management of ventricular arrhythmias.
Hospira has weathered its share of manufacturing issues and recalls over the years.
In late 2022, the company recalled one lot of its vancomycin hydrochloride injection vials because of glass particles in the vials. In July the same year, the company recalled one lot of the anesthetic propofol after an employee found “a visible particulate” in a vial during an annual inspection.
Back in 2017 and 2018, Hospira issued several recalls of injectables due to problems with particulates, microbial growth and a&nbsp;human hair found in a syringe&nbsp;of one lot of 25% dextrose&nbsp;injection for infants.
Pfizer bought Hospira for $17 billion in 2015.
 Load-Date: October 4, 2023

 

End of Document


Eye drops recalled after drug-resistant bacteria outbreak
The South Asian Times
February 6, 2023 Monday

 Copyright 2023 The South Asian Times, LLC. All Rights Reserved
Length: 325 words
Dateline: New York 
Body




New York, Feb. 6 -- U.S. health officials have said a company is recalling its over-the-counter eye drops that have been linked to an outbreak of drug-resistant infections.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has sent a health alert to doctors, saying the outbreak included at least 55 people in 12 states. One died and at least five others had permanent vision loss.
The infections, including some found in blood, urine and lungs, were linked to EzriCare Artificial Tears. Many said they had used the product, which is a lubricant used to treat irritation and dryness.
The eye drops are sold under the name EzriCare and are made in India by Global Pharma Healthcare. The Food and Drug Administration said the company recalled unexpired lots of EzriCare Artificial Tears and another product, Delsam Pharma's Artificial Tears.
The FDA recommended the recall based on manufacturing problems including lack of testing and proper controls on packaging. The agency also blocked import into the United States.
The infections were caused by a bacteria called Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Investigators detected the outbreak strain in open EzriCare bottles.
EzriCare, the company that markets the eye drops in the U.S., said it has stopped distributing the eye drops. It also has a notice on itswebsiteurging consumers to stop using the product.
Infections were diagnosed in patients in California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Nevada, Texas, Utah, Washington and Wisconsin. A person in Washington died with a blood infection.
Investigators found the bacteria were not susceptible to any antibiotics routinely tested at public health laboratories. However, a newer antibiotic named cefiderocol did seem to work.
Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from The South Asian Times. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
 Load-Date: February 6, 2023

 

End of Document


Diabetes Medication Recall 2020: More Metformin Drugs Recalled Over Cancer Concerns
Newstex Blogs 
International Business Times News
July 7, 2020 Tuesday 2:45 PM EST

 Copyright 2020 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 498 words
Body




Jul 07, 2020( International Business Times News: http://www.ibtimes.com Delivered by Newstex) ; Following several recalls[1] issued for the diabetes drug Metformin over high levels of thecancer-causing ingredient Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), Granules Pharmaceuticals[2]issued a recall for 12 lots of Metformin Hydrochloride Extended-Release tablets because they may contain NDMA, as well, at levels higher than are allowable by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.The recalled diabetes medication was sold in 750 mg dosages and packaged in 100- and 500-count bottles. The recalled Metformin was distributed nationwide to distributors and retailers.The medication affected by the recall carries the NDC No. 70010-492-01 in the 100-count bottles with lot and expiration dates of 4920003A/May-21, 4920004A/Jun-21, 4920005A/Jun-21, 4920009A/Nov-21, 4920010A/May-22, 4920011A/Jun-22, 4920012A/Jun-22, 4920013A/Jul-22, 4920014A/Jul-22, 4920015A/Aug-22, and 4920016A/Jan-23.In the 500-count bottles, the recalled Metformin carries the NDC No. of 70010-492-05 with a lot and expiration date of 4920005B/Jun-21.The drug is designed to improve blood sugar levels in adults with Type 2 diabetes[3] mellitus. Labels of the recalled Metformin can be viewed here[4].Consumers with questions about the recall or for information about returning the affected medication can contact Inmar Pharmaceutical Services for instructions and a return kit at 1-888-985-9117, Monday through Friday,9 a.m.-5 p.m. EDT, or by email at 
rxrecalls@inmar.com [5]. Inmar will provide details on how to receive reimbursement for medication.;Adverse reactions from the recalled Metformin can be reported to Granules Drug Safetyat 1-877-770-3183, Monday through Friday,8 a.m.-8 p.m. EDT, or by email at drugs.safety@granulesindia.com [6].; Granules recalled the medication 'out of an abundance of caution' after the FDA found unacceptable levels of NDMA in one of 12 batches gthat were distributed to the U.S. market.No other batches of the drug are affected by the recall, including Metformin Hydrochloride Immediate-Release tablets in 500 mg, 850 mgand 1,000 mg dosages, and Metformin Hydrochloride Extended-Release tablets in 500 mg dosages.The company said it hadnot received any reports of adverse reactions from the recall. type 1 and type 2 diabetes Photo: Tesa-Photography - Pixabay [ 1]: https://www.ibtimes.com/diabetes-drug-recall-2020-more-metformin-medication-recalled-cancer-causing-2992814 [ 2]: https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts/granules-pharmaceuticals-inc-issues-voluntary-nationwide-recall-metformin-hydrochloride-extended [ 3]: https://www.ibtimes.com/covid-19-might-trigger-diabetes-otherwise-healthy-individuals-clues-suggest-3000397 [ 4]: https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts/granules-pharmaceuticals-inc-issues-voluntary-nationwide-recall-metformin-hydrochloride-extended [ 5]: rxrecalls@inmar.com  [ 6]: drugs.safety@granulesindia.com  
 Load-Date: July 7, 2020

 

End of Document


Blood Pressure Medication Recall 2021: Hypertension Drug Recalled Over Potential Death Risk
Newstex Blogs 
International Business Times News
March 25, 2021 Thursday 3:45 PM EST

 Copyright 2021 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 416 words
Body




Mar 25, 2021( International Business Times News: http://www.ibtimes.com Delivered by Newstex)  A recall has been issued by Alembic Pharmaceuticals[1] for one lot ofits Telmisartan tablets that could pose a life-threateningrisk.The pharmaceutical company received a 'market complaint' that one bottle of the medication improperly contained the wrong dosage of the drug. The affected medication, which was supposed to be packaged as 20 mg Telmisartan tablets in 30-count bottles, was reported to contain 30 tablets of Telmisartan in a 40 mg dose.Telmisartan is used for the treatment of hypertension to lower blood pressure[2]. If ahigher dosage of themedication was taken for a prolonged period of time, users could experience low blood pressure, worsening kidney function, or increased potassium levels, which could result indeath.The recalled Telmisartan tablets have a lot number of 1905005661 and an NDC number of 62332-087-30. The expiration date of the medication is March 2022.The drug can be identified by an oval shape that is white to off-white and debossed with L203 on one side instead of the correct medication that is a round shape, white to off-white in color, and debossed with L 202 on one side. 
Labels and images of the medication can be viewed here[3].The affected Telmisartan tablets were distributed nationwide to pharmacies, retailers, and wholesalers.Consumers that have the recalled medication in their possession should not stop taking the drug until they speak to their pharmacist or healthcare providerto determine a replacement option.Users of the recalled Telmisartan that experience any problems related to the medication should contact their physician.Questions about the recall can be directed to Alembic Pharmaceuticals at 1-908-552-5839, Monday through Friday, from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. EDT or by email at david.cobb@alembicusa.com .;Alembic Pharmaceuticals said it has not received any reports of adverse effects from the recalled medication. A representational image of medicine. Photo: Myriams-Fotos, Pixabay [ 1]: https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts/alembic-pharmaceuticals-limited-issues-voluntary-nationwide-recall-telmisartan-tablets-usp-20-mg-due [ 2]: https://www.ibtimes.com/suffering-high-blood-pressure-here-are-7-things-you-can-do-lower-it-3134349 [ 3]: https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts/alembic-pharmaceuticals-limited-issues-voluntary-nationwide-recall-telmisartan-tablets-usp-20-mg-due 
 Load-Date: March 25, 2021

 

End of Document


ADHD Drug Recall as Mislabeled Package Sparks Warning
Pharma & Healthcare Monitor Worldwide
January 27, 2024 Saturday

 Copyright 2024 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 320 words
Body




Zenzedi, an attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) drug, has been recalled after a mislabeled package sparked a warning for prescribers of the medication.
Azurity Pharmaceuticals, Inc. announced the recall of one lot (F230169A) of Zenzedi CII (dextroamphetamine sulfate tablets, USP) 30 milligrams on Wednesday, which the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) put on its website on Thursday. The recalled lot was shipped to wholesalers from August 23, 2023, to November 29, 2023.
In the announcement, Azurity Pharmaceuticals said that a pharmacist in Nebraska reported opening a bottle of Zenzedi only to find tablets of Carbinoxamine Maleate, which is an antihistamine drug. Following the report, the drug manufacturer opened a product complaint, which was proceeded by an investigation.
Zenzedi 30 mg tablets are light yellow and shaped like a hexagon. It has the number 30 on one side and the letters MIA on the other side. Meanwhile, Carbinoxamine Maleate tablets USP, 4 mg, which were found by the pharmacist, are white and round, with the number 211 on one side and the letters GL on the other.
In addition to ADHD, Zenzedi is used to treat narcolepsy, a sleeping disorder. Azurity Pharmaceuticals warned in its release that "patients who take carbinoxamine instead of Zenzedi will experience undertreatment of their symptoms, which may result in functional impairment and an increased risk of accidents or injury."
It also warned that for ADHD and narcolepsy patients "there is a reasonable probability that accidents or injuries that occur due to the sedating effects of carbinoxamine, could lead to ongoing disability or death in severe cases..."
The pharmaceuticals company listed the following adverse events that patients who unknowingly took carbinoxamine may experience:
Drowsiness
Sleepiness
Central nervous system (CNS) depression
Increased eye pressure
Enlarged prostate urinary obstruction
Thyroid disorder
 Load-Date: January 27, 2024

 

End of Document


Diabetes Medication Recall 2021: Another Metformin Drug Recalled Over Possible Cancer Fears
Newstex Blogs 
International Business Times News
June 14, 2021 Monday 5:50 PM EST

 Copyright 2021 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 443 words
Body




Jun 14, 2021( International Business Times News: http://www.ibtimes.com Delivered by Newstex)  
 Viona Pharmaceuticals[1] has recalled two lots of the diabetes medication Metformin —the latest in a string of recalls[2] for the drug — over concerns of higher than acceptable levels of a possible cancer-causing ingredient. 
The recalled medication may contain Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) impurities in levels that are above the acceptable daily limits set by the Food and Drug Administration. NDMA is classified as a probable human carcinogen, a substance that could cause cancer. 
Two lots of Metformin Hydrochloride Extended-Release tablets in 750 mg dosages were voluntarily recalled by Viona Pharmaceuticals. The Metformin drug is used to manage blood glucose in adults with Type 2 diabetes[3]. 
The affected medication was manufactured by Cadila Healthcare Limited of Ahmedabad, India, in November 2019 and distributed by Viona nationwide. 

The recalled Metformin was packaged in 100-count bottles with an NDC number of 72578-036-01. The batch number for the diabetes drug is M915601, and the expiration date is October 2021. 
The tablets can be identified as white to off-white, capsule-shaped, uncoated tablets that are debossed with a 'Z,' 'C' on one side, and '20' on the other side. 
Patients are advised to continue taking the affected medication and contact their physician for advice regarding an alternative treatment plan. The FDA said that it could be dangerous for patients with this serious health condition to stop taking Metformin without first talking to their healthcare provider. 
Questions about the recall can be directed to Viona's processor, Eversana Life Science Services, by phone at 1-888-304-5022, Option 1, Monday through Friday from 8 a.m. to 7 pm. CT. 
To report an adverse event from the medication or a quality issue, consumers can contact Viona Pharmaceuticals at 1-888-304-5011, Monday through Friday, from 8:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. ET. 
Viona said it has not received any reports of adverse events related to the recall of the medication. Consumers that experience any issues related to the recalled diabetes medication should contact their healthcare provider. 
 four lifestyle tips to stop diabetes and keep blood sugars low Photo: stevepb - Pixabay 
 [ 1]: https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts/viona-pharmaceuticals-inc-issues-voluntary-nationwide-recall-metformin-hcl-extended-release-tablets [ 2]: https://www.ibtimes.com/metformin-recall-2020-diabetes-medications-continue-recalls-over-cancer-risks-3008573 [ 3]: https://www.ibtimes.com/2-fruit-servings-day-slash-type-2-diabetes-risk-36-study-3215597 
 Load-Date: June 14, 2021

 

End of Document


Nephron recalls 2.1M drug doses, devices on sterility concerns
FiercePharma Manufacturing
June 2, 2022

 Copyright 2022 Questex Media Group LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: ARTICLE
Length: 219 words
Byline: Joseph Keenan
Body




Nephron Pharmaceuticals, a generic drug maker, cited sterility issues as the cause of a voluntary nationwide recall of 2.1 million doses of medicine.
The recall listed on the FDA's website specifies “lack of assurance of sterility” as the trigger for the company's action.
In a statement, Nephron CEO Lou Kennedy told WIS News there "has been no impact to patient safety, and there is no evidence of contamination" but that the company has recalled the products "in the interest of patients."
The Columbia, South Carolina-based company said it was cooperating with the FDA and will provide information to healthcare providers and patients.
Among the products being recalled are sodium bicarbonate injections, epinephrine injections, fentanyl&nbsp;citrate bags and many others.
Nephron, which moved to South Carolina in 2015, pumped $215.8 million into its facility in 2020 as it was experiencing explosive growth in its generic inhalation and suspension products.
The company is no stranger to recalls. In 2015, when the company was still based in Orlando, Florida, it recalled more than 80,000 cartons of its over-the-counter asthma treatment, which it said had discoloration issues. The company had previously raised the ire of the FDA in 2013 concerning approval and marketing issues regarding the OTC asthma product.
 Load-Date: June 6, 2022

 

End of Document


Sun Pharma issues recall of gout drug due to microbial contamination
FiercePharma Manufacturing
March 11, 2024

 Copyright 2024 Questex Media Group LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: ARTICLE
Length: 221 words
Byline: Joseph Keenan
Body




The U.S. branch of India's Sun Pharma issued a voluntary recall of more than 55,000 bottles of febuxostat tablets used to treat gout after a report of microbial contamination in the company's manufacturing facility.
The Class II recall, which is what the FDA defines as situations that may cause temporary health consequences or&nbsp;a remote chance of serious health outcomes, was initiated on January 18 and covers 55,272 bottles of 40-milligram and 80-milligram dosages, the agency said in an enforcement report.
Febuxostat is prescribed to reduce uric acid levels in patients diagnosed with gout.
The recalled batches were manufactured at Sun Pharma's Dadra facility In India for Northstar Rx, which is based in Memphis, and distributed nationwide in the U.S.
The regulatory agency said “microbial contamination was reported in stagnant water in the duct of the manufacturing equipment.”
Sun Pharma was most recently in the news for completing its bid to acquire Taro Pharmaceutical that was initiated 17 years ago. In January, Sun agreed to purchase outstanding shares of Israel-based Taro for $43 each, which equated to a value of $348 million and a 48% premium on Taro's share price of $29.
The company first began courting Taro in 2007 but was rebuffed. A 2012 attempt to take Taro private was also rejected by its shareholders.
 Load-Date: March 12, 2024

 

End of Document


Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up
NBC - 8 WFLA: Web Edition Articles (Florida)
June 16, 2023 Friday

 Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 WFLA, Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc. 
Section: NATIONAL
Length: 312 words
Byline: Delaney Murray
Body




https://www.wfla.com/news/national/schizophrenia-and-nausea-drugs-recalled-after-labeling-mix-up/(opens in a new tab)
LA VERGNE, Tenn. (WRIC) – The Harvard Drug Group has recalled a single lot of the drugs Dronabinol and Ziprasidone Hydrochloride after labels on the two drugs were mixed up. 
During the distribution process, it was discovered that cartons labeled as Ziprasidone Hydrochloride actually contained packages labeled as and containing Dronabinol, according to the Food and Drug Administration. 
Ziprasidone Hydrochloride is used for the treatment of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, while Dronabinol is frequently used to treat nausea, vomiting and loss of appetite in chemotherapy and AIDS patients. 
Patients who mistakenly take a dose of Dronabinol instead of Ziprasidone Hydrochloride can experience worsening symptoms of bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, including agitation, aggression, delirium and self-harm. Older people may be "particularly at risk." 
"Taking an unexpected dose of Dronabinol may cause mental and cognitive effects that result in impairment of mental and/or physical abilities," the FDA stated. "This can include worsening of symptoms in patients with mental illness disorders and limitation of patients' abilities to safely complete hazardous activities." 
The Harvard Drug Group specifically recalled all 2.5mg Dronabinol Capsules and all 20 mg Ziprasidone Hydrochloride Capsules labeled with Lot T04769. 
The group has not received any reports of patients experiencing adverse symptoms related to the recall, the FDA said. 
Anyone with questions about the recall can contact Sedgwick, Inc. by phone at 1-888-759-6904 or by email address harvarddrug6068@sedgwick.com 
Patients should contact their doctor or healthcare provider if they have experienced any problems that may be related to taking Dronabinol or Ziprasidone Hydrochloride.
 Load-Date: June 16, 2023

 

End of Document


ADHD drug Zenzedi recalled over pill mixup
Newstex Blogs 
Medical Xpress
January 30, 2024 Tuesday 8:32 PM EST

 Copyright 2024 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 331 words
Body




January 30th, 2024 ( Medical Xpress  — Delivered by  Newstex )
The maker of a drug used to treat ADHD and narcolepsy has recalled one lot of the medication after a pill mixup was discovered.
The recall notice , issued by Azurity Pharmaceuticals Inc., states that one lot of Zenzedi 30-milligram tablets is being recalled after a pharmacist found antihistamine tablets in a bottle labeled as Zenzedi.
The active compound in Zenzedi is dextroamphetamine sulfate, a stimulant used for the treatment of narcolepsy  and ADHD. Meanwhile, the allergy drug found in the mislabeled bottles contains the sedative carbinoxamine, which has the opposite effect of a stimulant .
The recall comes amid an ongoing national shortage of ADHD drugs, creating further frustration for people with ADHD who have struggled to find medications for their condition, CNN reported.
The recall notice  said that people who take carbinoxamine instead of Zenzedi have a higher risk of accidents or injuries and may have drowsiness, increased eye pressure, urinary obstruction and thyroid disorder. The recalled lot has the lot number F230169A and an expiration date of June 2025.
Azurity added that it has not received any reports of serious injury related to the medication mixup.
Consumers who have the recalled medication should return it to their pharmacy and call their doctor if they have any bad reactions to the drug.
Problems may also be reported to the FDA's MedWatch  Adverse Event Reporting program.
More information: Drugs.com has more on Zenzedi .
2024 HealthDay. All rights reserved.
Citation : ADHD drug Zenzedi recalled over pill mixup (2024, January 30) retrieved 30 January 2024 from https://medicalxpress.com/news/2024-01-adhd-drug-zenzedi-recalled-pill.html
This document is subject to copyright. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of private study or research, no part may be reproduced without the written permission. The content is provided for information purposes only.
Link to the original story.
 Notes



The views expressed in any and all content distributed by Newstex and its re-distributors (collectively, the "Newstex Authoritative Content") are solely those of the respective author(s) and not necessarily the views of Newstex or its re-distributors. Stories from such authors are provided "AS IS," with no warranties, and confer no rights. The material and information provided in Newstex Authoritative Content are for general information only and should not, in any respect, be relied on as professional advice. Newstex Authoritative Content is not "read and approved" before it is posted. Accordingly, neither Newstex nor its re-distributors make any claims, promises or guarantees about the accuracy, completeness, or adequacy of the information contained therein or linked to from such content, nor do they take responsibility for any aspect of such content. The Newstex Authoritative Content shall be construed as author-based content and commentary. Accordingly, no warranties or other guarantees are offered as to the quality of the opinions, commentary or anything else appearing in such Newstex Authoritative Content. Newstex and its re-distributors expressly reserve the right to delete stories at its and their sole discretion.
 Load-Date: January 30, 2024

 

End of Document


Second time in amonth, Indian firm recalls eye drug from US
Times of India (Electronic Edition)
March 1, 2023 Wednesday
Pune Edition

 Copyright 2023 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: TIMES NATION
Length: 217 words
Byline: Yogesh.Kabirdoss@timesgroup.com
Body




Chennai: In a second recall within a month, Global Pharma Healthcare has recalled artificial eye ointment lubricant due to possible contamination in the US market. The ointment is used as an eye lubricant and to relieve dryness of eyes.  Early February, the Chennai-headquartered pharmaceutical company had announced recalling of artificial tears lubricant eyedrops. Global Pharma Healthcare, however, said when the artificial tears lubricant eyedrops were subjected to investigations, results proved there was no evidence of contamination to date. While the announcement said the use of contaminated eye ointment may cause adverse events, including infection in the eye that could lead to blindness, the company has not received any reports of adverse events related to this product. Further, the company has notified the brand owner and importer of  this product, Delsam Pharma, about the recall and urged wholesalers, retailers and customers, who have the recalled product, to stop any use and discard the product safely and appropriately.  When contacted, Global Pharma Healthcare told TOI, “Early in February 2023, a voluntary product recall of Ezricare/Delsam eyedrops (which were contract manufactured) was issued based on claims by the USDFDA/CDC regarding possible contamination of products. ”
 Load-Date: March 1, 2023

 

End of Document


FDA posts a flurry of voluntary drug recalls by Teva, Glenmark, Apotex and VistaPharm
FiercePharma Manufacturing
December 7, 2023

 Copyright 2023 Questex Media Group LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: ARTICLE
Length: 400 words
Byline: Joseph Keenan
Highlight: The FDA posted a flurry of voluntary drug recalls by drug manufacturers on its website. Read about the companies and products being recalled.\r
Body




The FDA posted a flurry of voluntary drug recalls&nbsp;by drug manufacturers on its website. Below are the companies and products being recalled.
VistaPharm issued its Class III recall Oct. 17 for more than 2,300 bottles of aminocaproic acid oral solution that is used to treat serious bleeding conditions, especially when the bleeding occurs after dental surgery or other kinds of surgery. The company cited failed specifications for the action, specifically, a high content of ethylene glycol. Where the product was manufactured was not provided. The bottles were distributed nationwide in the U.S.
Class III recalls involve&nbsp;products that violate federal regulations but are unlikely to cause adverse health consequences.
Aptotex issued four separate Class II recalls Nov. 1 for more than 149,000 bottles distributed nationwide in the U.S. of prescription-only paroxetine hydrochloride tablets that are used to treat a variety of conditions, including depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder and panic disorder. The company cited failed impurities and/or degradation, out-of-specification results. The products were manufactured at the company's Toronto production site.
A Class II recall is issued with a product has a lower chance of causing major injuries or death, but it is still possible for serious enough adverse events to have irreversible consequences.
Glenmark Pharmaceuticals issued two separate Class II recalls for products due to a mislabeling issue involving Indomethacin and Naproxen. The recalls for both were issued Nov. 7. The company recalled 37,200 bottles of Indomethacin, which is a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory used to treat pain and arthritis symptoms. It recalled five lots (no bottle count provided) of Naproxen that is used to reduce fever or relieve mild pain due to headaches and muscle aches and other minor maladies. Both products may have been mislabeled as the other, the company said. The drugs were manufactured at both the Glenmark facility in Goa, India, and the company's New Jersey facility.
Teva issued a Class III recall for one lot of 30 unit-dose packets per carton of testosterone gel due to out-of-specification issues related to viscosity. The product, which was produced at the Teva facility in North Wales, Pennsylvania, is used to treat hypogonadism in men. The recall was issued Nov. 10 for the lot that was distributed nationwide in the U.S.
 Load-Date: December 8, 2023

 

End of Document


Lupin Pharmaceuticals Recalls Pregnancy Prevention Drug In US
Business World
August 1, 2023

 Copyright 2023 Business World, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 287 words
Byline: BW Online Bureau
Body




Lupin Pharmaceuticals Inc., a wholly-owned subsidiary of Lupin is voluntarily recalling two lots of Tydemy to the patient level due to out-of-specification (OOS) test results at the 12-month stability time point. Specifically, one lot (L200183) tested low for ascorbic acid (an inactive ingredient) and high for a known impurity, USFDA said in a statement on Friday.
Tydemy is an estrogen/progestin oral contraceptive (COC) indicated for use by women to prevent pregnancy and to raise folate levels in women who choose to use an oral contraceptive for contraception.
To date, Lupin has received no reports of adverse events related to either recalled batches. Regardless, Lupin is recalling these two batches because if there were a significant reduction in the amount of inactive content (ascorbic acid), this could potentially impact the effectiveness of the product which could potentially result in an unexpected pregnancy.
The lots were distributed nationwide in the US to wholesalers, drug chains, mail order pharmacies and supermarkets, USFDA said.
Lupin is notifying its wholesalers, distributors, drug chains, mail order pharmacies and supermarkets by phone and through recall notification and is arranging for the return of all the recalled product lots.
USFDA advised that patients taking Tydemy are advised to continue taking their medication and immediately contact their pharmacist, physician, or medical provider for advice regarding an alternative treatment. Whereas the top drug regulatory said that wholesalers, distributors and retailers that have Tydemy that is being recalled should discontinue distribution of the recalled product lots immediately.
 Copyright BW Healthcareworld  2018. All Rights Reserved.
 Load-Date: August 1, 2023

 

End of Document


Pfizer Recalls Anti-smoking Drug Chantix Tablets
RTT News (United States)
July 20, 2021 Tuesday

 Copyright 2021 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2021 RTT News All Rights Reserved
Length: 317 words
Byline: editorial@rttnews.com,  (RTT Staff Writer)
Body




       Drug major Pfizer is recalling twelve lots of Chantix (Varenicline) Tablets, a treatment to help patients quit smoking, citing the presence of a nitrosamine impurity, N-nitroso-varenicline, above the established Acceptable Daily Intake or ADI level.
 The U.D. Food and Drug Administration noted that the recall involves two lots of Chantix 0.5mg Tablets, two lots of Chantix 1 mg Tablets, and eight lots of a Chantix kit of 0.5mg/1 mg Tablets to the patient level.
 The product lots were distributed nationwide to wholesalers and distributors in the United States and Puerto Rico from June 2019 to June 2021.
 According to the agency, long-term ingestion of N-nitroso-varenicline may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans. However, there is no immediate risk to patients taking Chantix, which is intended for short term use.
 The FDA stated that the health benefits of stopping smoking outweigh the theoretical potential cancer risk from the nitrosamine impurity in varenicline.
 Everyone is exposed to some level of nitrosamines, which are common in water and foods, including cured and grilled meats, dairy products and vegetables. These impurities may increase the risk of cancer if people are exposed to them above acceptable levels over long periods of time.
 Pfizer said it believes the benefit/risk profile of CHANTIX remains positive. Patients currently taking Chantix are asked to consult with their doctor to confirm if they received an affected lot, and if appropriate, about alternative treatment options.
 Pfizer has not received any reports of adverse events that have been related to this recall to date.
 In similar recalls, Viona Pharmaceuticals Inc. in mid June recalled type 2 diabetes drug Metformin in the form of oral film-coated tablets for the potential presence of nitrosamine impurity, N-Nitrosodimethylamine or NDMA, above ADI levels.        
 Load-Date: July 21, 2021

 

End of Document


Pfizer Recalls Anti-smoking Drug Chantix Tablets
CE Noticias Financieras English
July 20, 2021 Tuesday

 Copyright 2021 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2021 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved
Length: 317 words
Body




       Drug major Pfizer is recalling twelve lots of Chantix (Varenicline) Tablets, a treatment to help patients quit smoking, citing the presence of a nitrosamine impurity, N-nitroso-varenicline, above the established Acceptable Daily Intake or ADI level.
 The U.D. Food and Drug Administration noted that the recall involves two lots of Chantix 0.5mg Tablets, two lots of Chantix 1 mg Tablets, and eight lots of a Chantix kit of 0.5mg/1 mg Tablets to the patient level.
 The product lots were distributed nationwide to wholesalers and distributors in the United States and Puerto Rico from June 2019 to June 2021.
 According to the agency, long-term ingestion of N-nitroso-varenicline may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans. However, there is no immediate risk to patients taking Chantix, which is intended for short term use.
 The FDA stated that the health benefits of stopping smoking outweigh the theoretical potential cancer risk from the nitrosamine impurity in varenicline.
 Everyone is exposed to some level of nitrosamines, which are common in water and foods, including cured and grilled meats, dairy products and vegetables. These impurities may increase the risk of cancer if people are exposed to them above acceptable levels over long periods of time.
 Pfizer said it believes the benefit/risk profile of CHANTIX remains positive. Patients currently taking Chantix are asked to consult with their doctor to confirm if they received an affected lot, and if appropriate, about alternative treatment options.
 Pfizer has not received any reports of adverse events that have been related to this recall to date.
 In similar recalls, Viona Pharmaceuticals Inc. in mid June recalled type 2 diabetes drug Metformin in the form of oral film-coated tablets for the potential presence of nitrosamine impurity, N-Nitrosodimethylamine or NDMA, above ADI levels.        
 Load-Date: July 21, 2021

 

End of Document


Pfizer Recalls Anti-smoking Drug Chantix Tablets
dpa-AFX International ProFeed
July 20, 2021 Tuesday 10:12 AM GMT

 Copyright 2021 dpa-AFX Wirtschaftsnachrichten GmbH All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 322 words
Body




       NEW YORK CITY (dpa-AFX) - Drug major Pfizer is recalling twelve lots of Chantix (Varenicline) Tablets, a treatment to help patients quit smoking, citing the presence of a nitrosamine impurity, N-nitroso-varenicline, above the established Acceptable Daily Intake or ADI level.  The U.D. Food and Drug Administration noted that the recall involves two lots of Chantix 0.5mg Tablets, two lots of Chantix 1 mg Tablets, and eight lots of a Chantix kit of 0.5mg/1 mg Tablets to the patient level.  The product lots were distributed nationwide to wholesalers and distributors in the United States and Puerto Rico from June 2019 to June 2021.  According to the agency, long-term ingestion of N-nitroso-varenicline may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans. However, there is no immediate risk to patients taking Chantix, which is intended for short term use.  The FDA stated that the health benefits of stopping smoking outweigh the theoretical potential cancer risk from the nitrosamine impurity in varenicline.  Everyone is exposed to some level of nitrosamines, which are common in water and foods, including cured and grilled meats, dairy products and vegetables. These impurities may increase the risk of cancer if people are exposed to them above acceptable levels over long periods of time.  Pfizer said it believes the benefit/risk profile of CHANTIX remains positive. Patients currently taking Chantix are asked to consult with their doctor to confirm if they received an affected lot, and if appropriate, about alternative treatment options.  Pfizer has not received any reports of adverse events that have been related to this recall to date.  In similar recalls, Viona Pharmaceuticals Inc. in mid June recalled type 2 diabetes drug Metformin in the form of oral film-coated tablets for the potential presence of nitrosamine impurity, N-Nitrosodimethylamine or NDMA, above ADI levels.      
 Load-Date: July 20, 2021

 

End of Document


New drug recall issued: Stop taking these cold & flu medicines immediately
BGR
December 16, 2021

 Copyright 2021 Penske Media Corporation All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 538 words
Body




After the COVID-19 drug recall from a few days ago, we'll also warn you about a medicine recall that involves a different illness that's in season in the winter. That's the flu, an endemic infectious disease that's been overshadowed in recent years by the novel coronavirus. Unlike the COVID drug recall that had no immediate effect on consumers, the new Rompe Pecho cold and flu drug recall is something you'll want to pay attention to. That's because you might currently own several brands of the cold and flu drugs covered in the recall, whereas the remdesivir recall only concerned hospitals.
Don't Miss: Thursday's deals: 99¢ Amazon Smart Plug, gift card deals, $89 AirPods, more
The Rompe Pecho cold and flu drug recall
Efficient Laboratories expanded its voluntary Rompe Pecho cold and flu drug recall this week to include an additional 12 lots of products that might be contaminated with microbes. The recall includes Rompe Pecho CF, Rompe Pecho EX, Rompe Pecho MAX, and Rompe Pecho DM.
The drugmaker distributed these cold and flu drugs in 2019, but they don't expire until 2022. Therefore, buyers might still have several versions of these recalled drugs at home.
The company advises customers not to use the cold and flu drugs in the following lots, as all of them are included in the expanded recall:
Rompe Pecho CF - Lots: 19F88 (Exp. Jun. 2022); 19G164 (Exp. Jul. 2022)Rompe Pecho DM - Lots: 19F168 (Exp. Jun. 2022); 19G145 (Exp. Jul. 2022); 19G361 (Exp. Jul. 2022); 19G449 (Exp. Jul. 2022); 19G491 (Exp. Jul. 2022)Rompe Pecho EX - Lots: 19H20 (Exp. Aug. 2022); 19J98 (Exp. Sep. 2022); 19A418 (Exp. Jan. 2022); 19E411 (Exp. May 2022)Rompe Pecho MAX - Lot: 19G219 (Exp. Jul. 2022)
Efficient Laboratories cites microbial contamination concerns as the reason for the Rompe Pecho cold and flu drug recall. Consumption of these cold and flu drugs in the recall might lead to illness, according to the press release on the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website.
What you should do
Efficient Laboratories says it has not received any reports of adverse events related to the four Rompe Pecho brands above. Efficient Laboratories said back in January 2020 that consuming the contaminated medicine could result in vomiting and diarrhea. That's the initial Rompe Pecho recall that the drugmaker expanded a few days ago to include the new lots above.
The company says it distributed the Rompe Pecho products in the recall nationwide to wholesalers and retailers. The lot numbers and expiration dates are on the bottom of the cartons containing the recalled cold and flu drugs.
Customers who have Rompe Pecho EX, Rompe Pecho CF, Rompe Pecho DM, or Rompe Pecho MAX should discard their supply if it's part of the lots in the recall.
If you've experienced any issues after taking the cold and flu drug in the recall, you should contact your doctor.
You should check out the full press release at this link, which contains contact information for Efficient Laboratories and the FDA. Also, make sure you go through the original Rompe Pecho flu drug recall from January 2020. The current drug recall is an expansion of that action.
The post New drug recall issued: Stop taking these cold & flu medicines immediately appeared first on BGR.
 Load-Date: January 22, 2022

 

End of Document


Fla. Hospital Faces New Trial In Amputee's Recalled Drug Suit
Law360 Legal News - Corporate
January 21, 2022 Friday

 Copyright 2022 Portfolio Media, Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Section: APPELLATE, FLORIDA, HEALTH, PERSONAL INJURY & MEDICAL MALPRACTICE, PRODUCT LIABILITY
Length: 613 words
Byline: Jonathan Capriel
Highlight: A Florida state appeals court on Friday overturned a hospital's win in a civil trial accusing it of failing to properly recall tainted medication allegedly administered to a patient that caused a coma, gangrene and a double amputation, finding there is conflicting evidence that a jury must sort out.
Body




A Florida state appeals court on Friday overturned a hospital's win in a civil trial accusing it of failing to properly recall tainted medication allegedly administered to a patient that caused a coma, gangrene and a double amputation, finding there is conflicting evidence that a jury must sort out.

 The three-judge panel for the Fifth District Court of Appeal overturned a directed verdict awarded to Holmes Regional Medical Center Inc. that ended former patient Robert Dumigan's negligence lawsuit, which claims medical staff injected him with contaminated heparin, a blood-thinning drug, right before he underwent a heart bypass surgery to correct a blockage in 2008.

 After the procedure, Dumigan fell into a coma for 20 days. He developed ischemia, a condition where blood pressure drops to dangerous levels. His legs stopped working, and medical staff eventually needed to cut off his right foot and left leg, according to court records.

 The appeals court found that trial judge Michelle L. Naberhaus erred when she prevented the jury from deliberating on Dumigan's case because she said it relied on "inference stacking."

 But this wasn't the case, said Judge Jay P. Cohen, who wrote the opinion for the panel. And, while this is the third time Dumigan's claims have appeared before the state's Fifth District Court of Appeal, it's the second time "these very issues were raised and decided," Judge Cohen said.

 Specifically, Judge Naberhaus ruled that the plaintiff's expert witness, Dr. Mark Levin, couldn't conclude that Dumigan's injuries were caused by tainted heparin unless Levin made that assumption on top of an inference that the hospital had failed to remove all of the recalled medicine.

 "So even stopping there, you can't get to issues of causation without having gone through the stacking of inferences," Judge Naberhaus said in her ruling, according to the court record.

 But Dumigan's expert relied on multiple independent medical facts, Judge Cohen said. Levin noted that the patient had what appeared to be side effects that can be associated with bad heparin. Moreover, Dumigan didn't have an allergic reaction to the drug when he received it two years earlier.

 The trial court's ruling that Levin's opinion relied on insufficient evidence of a failed recall was nearly identical to one made by the hospital when it secured a summary judgment dismissal in 2020, Judge Cohen said.

 "The issue of whether Dumigan was given contaminated heparin has not changed; furthermore, the alleged impermissible stacking within Dr. Levin's opinion was already raised and addressed," Judge Cohen said. "The trial court believed that the analysis was different here because [the previous decision] involved summary judgment rather than directed verdict."

 While there is some doubt as to whether the tainted drug lingered in the hospital, the fact of the matter is, "Holmes Regional cannot conclusively state that it removed all contaminated heparin prior to his surgery," Judge Cohen said.

 "As such, the evidence in this case, while conflicting and susceptible to different reasonable inferences, should have been submitted as a question of fact to be determined by the jury," Judge Cohen said.

 Judges Jay P. Cohen, John M. Harris and Carrie Ann Wozniak sat on the panel.

 Dumigan was represented by Stephen Joseph Biggie of Arcadier Biggie & Wood PLLC.

 The hospital was represented by Andrew S. Bolin of Bolin Law Group.

 The case is Robert Dumigan, individually and as the executor of the estate of Edith Dumigan, v. Holmes Regional Medical Center Inc., case number 21-1087, in the Fifth District Court of Appeal of the State of Florida.

 --Editing by JoVona Taylor.
Link to PDF
 Load-Date: February 3, 2022

 

End of Document


Pfizer recalls migraine drug Nurtec ODT after millions of products lacked child resistant packaging
USA Today Online
March 16, 2023

 Copyright 2023 Gannett Media Corp  All Rights Reserved
Section: PHARMA INDUSTRY NEWS & PFIZER NEWS
Length: 573 words
Byline: Wyatte Grantham-Philips, USA TODAY
Body




Link to Image
Pfizer is distributing child resistant pouches for consumers of Nurtec ODT, a prescription migraine medication that was recalled for not fulfilling safety requirements in its packaging, the company and the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission said on Thursday.
The recall impacts Nurtec ODT (rimegepant) 75mg orally disintegrating tablets sold in packs containing eight doses on a blister card. Nurtec ODT is a medication prescribed for the acute treatment of migraine attacks and the prevention of episodic migraine in adults, according to Nurtec ODT's website. 
According to the CPSC's notice, the packaging of the medication "is not child resistant, posing a risk of poisoning if the contents are swallowed by young children." The agency noted that, per the Poison Prevention Packaging Act, the prescription drugs are required to have child resistant packaging.
Food and drug Recalls: Stay up to date with the latest recalls using USA TODAY's Database.
Car recall: Honda recalls 448,000 Accords, CR-Vs, Odysseys and more models over faulty seatbelts
What should you do with the recalled products?
Consumers do not need to throw away the impacted Nurtec ODT or return the medication to distributors. Instead, they should ensure that the drugs are "out of the sight and reach of children and contact Pfizer for a free child resistant pouch to store the product," CPSC writes.
In a statement sent to USA TODAY on Thursday, Pfizer also noted that the company has instructed pharmacists to place the blister holding the Nurtec ODT tablets in a child-resistant vial before dispensing new packages to patients "as an interim measure."
Pfizer said there are "no quality or safety issues nor health risks" when patients take the medicine as prescribed for its approved use. 
"CPSC defines the term 'recall' to describe any repair, replacement, refund, or notice/warning program," Pfizer said. "This does not necessitate return of product."
According to both Pfizer and the CPSC, no injuries or incidents related to the Nurtec ODT recall have been reported at this time.
Pfizer is working to develop new packaging "as a long-term solution."
Pet food recall: Over 60 brands of Omega-3 pet supplements sold on Amazon, Chewy recalled after dog gets sick
How can I tell if my migraine medication is impacted?
The CPSC notes that the recalled Nurtec ODT was sold at pharmacies nationwide from December 2021 through March 2023. The price of the prescription drugs varied based on consumers' health insurance and other factors.
An estimated 4.2 million units of Nurtec ODT were distributed in this time frame. Because most of the medications may have been used already, the Pfizer spokesperson says the company believes about 300,000 units are still on the market.
To receive a free child resistant pouch, patients can call Pfizer at 1-800-879-3477.
The National Drug Code (NDC) Number of the recalled products is 72618-3000-2. 
Pfizer acquired Nurtec ODT as part of the company's acquisition of Biohaven Pharmaceuticals in October 2022. After learning that the medication's packaging didn't meet the requirements for child safety during a company evaluation, Pfizer alerted the CPSC, the spokesperson said.
What's everyone talking about? Sign up for our trending newsletter to get the latest news of the day.
This article originally appeared on USA TODAY: Pfizer recalls migraine drug Nurtec ODT after millions of products lacked child resistant packaging
 Load-Date: March 16, 2023

 

End of Document


Aurobindo's arm recalls ophthalmic drug in US
Times of India (Electronic Edition)
January 25, 2020 Saturday
Hyderabad Edition

 Copyright 2020 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: TIMES BUSINESS
Length: 221 words
Byline: TIMES NEWS NETWORK
Body




City-based pharma major Aurobindo Pharma's arm AuroMedics Pharma LLC has initiated a recall of multiple lots of Moxifloxacin ophthalmic solution 0.5% available in 3mL bottles in the US market. Moxifloxacin ophthalmic solution is an antibiotic used for the treatment of bacterial conjunctivitis.
The company is voluntarily recalling 1,00,080 bottles of Moxifloxacin eye solution due to market complaints of discolouration of the solution, US drug regulator US Food & Drug Administration (USFDA) said in its latest enforcement report uploaded online.
The recall, which involves four lots of the ophthalmic solution, has been classified as Class III by USFDA. The US drug watchdog terms a Class III recall as a situation in which use of or exposure to a violative product is not likely to cause adverse health consequences.
The ophthalmic solution, which is made in India, is distributed by Aurobindo Pharma USA Inc. The recall, which was initiated in the first week of December 2019 and is ongoing, is being conducted across the US market.
The company had bagged approval for launching the drug in the US market in 2017.
Last year saw Aurobindo Pharma recall multiple lots of blood pressure lowering drug Valsartan and antacid Ranitidine due to presence of impurities like N-nitrosodiethylamine (NDEA) and Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA).
 Load-Date: January 24, 2020

 

End of Document


US recalls of India-made drugs expose regulatory, quality control gaps
MINT
December 21, 2023 Thursday

 Copyright 2023 HT Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 845 words
Dateline: New Delhi 
Body




New Delhi, Dec. 21 -- The recent spate of recalls of drugs manufactured in India from the US market raises critical questions for Indian drug manufacturers and drug regulatory authorities: Are Indian lives cheaper than those of Americans? Are Indian drug standards and regulatory oversight on par with international norms?
Consider this. Sun Pharma recalled over 96,000 bottles of Liothyronine Sodium tablets from the US last week due to impurity concerns raised by the US regulator Food and Drugs Administration (FDA). Lupin recalled an unspecified quantity of penicillamine tablets, manufactured at its Nagpur facility, for "failed dissolution specifications".
Both recalls were classified as Class II by the USFDA, which is designated to a product with the "potential to cause a temporary or serious health problem".
Earlier in November, Glenmark Pharmaceuticals recalled 37,200 bottles of indomethacin capsules. Sun Pharma also recalled 2,016 bottles of bupropion hydrochloride extended-release tablets. Glenmark had mislabelled indomethacin capsules as Naproxen, another arthritis drug, while Sun Pharma's product was a Class II recall due to "failed dissolution specifications".
On November 15, Mumbai-based Kilitech Healthcare recalled all batches of 25 different formulations of eye drops from the US market, after a US FDA inspection flagged "unsanitary conditions" at the firm's manufacturing plant. One could go on.
According to statistics compiled by US law firm Lightfoot Law, which represents patients in injury cases against drug manufacturers, between 2012 and 2021, leading Indian pharma company Dr Reddy's had 98 recalls, Lupin had 71 recalls, Torrent had 77, Zydus had 44 and Aurobindo 34, just to name a few of the more prominent Indian pharma cos in that exhaustive list. In fact, FDA recalls totalled 12,787 between 2012 and 2021 (April-June).
In sharp contrast, there was next to no such recall in the Indian market of the same drugs manufactured by these companies.
India's $50 billion pharmaceuticals sector - the third largest globally- is also the world's biggest supplier of generic drugs. sector, which is also the biggest supplier of drugs to the US market, has repeatedly failed to meet the quality standards of the FDA.
An academic study by Shray Bablani and Manthan Janodia of the Manipal College of Pharmaceutical Sciences of FDA warning letters issued to Indian manufacturers between January 1, 2005, and December 31, 2018, found that "across the 14-year study period, the number of warning letters issued to Indian pharmaceutical and medical device manufacturers has gradually increased".
"Of all the violations listed in these warning letters, 85.87% were related to the failure of compliance with the current good manufacturing practices of FDA. Moreover, 80.72% of these warning letters were not followed by a close-out warning, which indicated that the violations listed in these warning letters could not be resolved," the study said.
While the US has different standards from India, the variation is not so wide that drugs that fail the test in the US meet Indian standards. India's drug standards are generally on par with global norms, but the gap lies in regulatory enforcement and oversight.
Unlike the US which has a law mandating recall of substandard drugs, India has no such law, even though a proposal to create such legislation was mooted in 1976. That year, a meeting of the Drugs Consultative Committee, which includes state drug controllers, the national drug regulator, the Central Drug Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO) and the ministry of health, discussed the need for a national law on drug recalls as it was found that drugs banned in one state were on sale in another.
This failed to materialise despite multiple prompting points to the lobbying power of the pharma industry. There is also a Centre-state divide, with states resisting greater centralisation of powers. There is also little interaction and information exchanged between the various central and state authorities. The health ministry simply lacks the expertise in complex drug regulatory issues.
There also appears to be a mistaken belief in some circles that having mandatory recalls will harm India's pharma exports. Nothing could be further from the truth. Recent controversies like the contaminated Indian cough syrup being linked to child deaths in Gambia and Uzbekistan have shown that in the era of social media, such reports of substandard drugs can cause more harm than a regulatory process.
If India wants to reach the next mile in the global pharmaceutical industry and move from being a supplier of cheap generics to more complex drugs and innovations, there must be global acceptance of its quality control and regulatory processes. Without this, the "Made in India' tag will become a drag in the highly competitive global pharmaceutical market.
Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from MINT. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
 Load-Date: December 21, 2023

 

End of Document


Medtronic Recalls 6,000 Drug-Coated Balloons Shipped in Potentially Unsterile Packaging
Newstex Blogs 
24x7 Magazine
April 6, 2022 Wednesday 5:12 PM EST

 Copyright 2022 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 462 words
Byline: Andy Lundin
Body




Apr 06, 2022( 24x7 Magazine: http://24x7mag.com/ Delivered by Newstex)  
 Medtronic is recalling a catheter product following uncertainty regarding whether packing for the item was sterile, adding another[1] item to an existing[2] list of Medtronic products already recalled over the last several months. 
Medtronic is asking its customers to send back several thousand of its drug-coated balloon catheters after identifying an issue with the sterilized pouch used to package each device. 
The recall is split between around 6,000 In.Pact Admiral catheters and just three In.Pact AV catheters that were distributed around the world. The devices are cleared by the FDA to treat femoropopliteal disease and fistula stenosis, respectively. 
Medtronic said it discovered the issue during a routine inspection. The pouches produced after an unspecified change implemented on one of the company's manufacturing lines were found to be at risk of damage, which could potentially cause the catheters to become unsterile. The recalled devices include all of those with packaging produced on that line after the change. 
Read the full article at Fierce Biotech[3]. 
 [ 1]: https://24x7mag.com/standards/fda-updates/recalls/medtronic-recalls-turbohawk-plus-atherectomy-system/ [ 2]: https://24x7mag.com/medical-equipment/patient-care-equipment/ventilators/medtronics-covidien-recall-some-puritan-bennett-ventilators-class-i/ [ 3]: https://www.fiercebiotech.com/medtech/medtronic-recalls-6000-drug-coated-balloons-shipped-potentially-unsterile-packaging 
The views expressed in any and all content distributed by Newstex and its re-distributors (collectively, the "Newstex Authoritative Content") are solely those of the respective author(s) and not necessarily the views of Newstex or its re-distributors. Stories from such authors are provided "AS IS," with no warranties, and confer no rights. The material and information provided in Newstex Authoritative Content are for general information only and should not, in any respect, be relied on as professional advice. Newstex Authoritative Content is not "read and approved" before it is posted. Accordingly, neither Newstex nor its re-distributors make any claims, promises or guarantees about the accuracy, completeness, or adequacy of the information contained therein or linked to from such content, nor do they take responsibility for any aspect of such content. The Newstex Authoritative Content shall be construed as author-based content and commentary. Accordingly, no warranties or other guarantees are offered as to the quality of the opinions, commentary or anything else appearing in such Newstex Authoritative Content. Newstex and its re-distributors expressly reserve the right to delete stories at its and their sole discretion.
 Load-Date: April 6, 2022

 

End of Document


New drug recall issued: Stop taking these cold & flu medicines immediately
Newstex Blogs 
Boy Genius Report
December 16, 2021 Thursday 2:28 PM EST

 Copyright 2021 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 835 words
Byline: Chris Smith
Body




Dec 16, 2021( Boy Genius Report: http://bgr.com/ Delivered by Newstex)  
 After the COVID-19 drug recall[1] from a few days ago, we'll also warn you about a medicine recall that involves a different illness that's in season in the winter. That's the flu, an endemic infectious disease that's been overshadowed in recent years by the novel coronavirus. Unlike the COVID drug recall that had no immediate effect on consumers, the new Rompe Pechocold and flu drug recall is something you'll want to pay attention to. That's because you might currently own several brands of the cold and flu drugs covered in the recall, whereas the remdesivir recall only concerned hospitals. 

 The Rompe Pecho cold and flu drug recall 

 Efficient Laboratories expanded its voluntary Rompe Pecho cold and flu drug recall this week to include an additional 12 lots of products that might be contaminated with microbes. The recall includes Rompe Pecho CF, Rompe Pecho EX, Rompe Pecho MAX, and Rompe Pecho DM. 

The drugmaker distributed these cold and flu drugs in 2019, but they don't expire until 2022. Therefore, buyers might still have several versions of these recalled drugs at home. 

 The company advises customers not to use the cold and flu drugs in the following lots, as all of them are included in the expanded recall: 

Rompe Pecho CF - Lots: 19F88 (Exp. Jun. 2022); 19G164 (Exp. Jul. 2022) Rompe Pecho DM - Lots: 19F168 (Exp. Jun. 2022); 19G145 (Exp. Jul. 2022); 19G361 (Exp. Jul. 2022); 19G449 (Exp. Jul. 2022); 19G491 (Exp. Jul. 2022) Rompe Pecho EX - Lots: 19H20 (Exp. Aug. 2022); 19J98 (Exp. Sep. 2022); 19A418 (Exp. Jan. 2022); 19E411 (Exp. May 2022) Rompe Pecho MAX - Lot: 19G219 (Exp. Jul. 2022) 

Efficient Laboratories cites microbial contamination concerns as the reason for the Rompe Pecho cold and flu drug recall. Consumption of these cold and flu drugs in the recall might lead to illness, according to the press release[2] on the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website. 

What you should do 

Efficient Laboratories says it has not received any reports of adverse events related to the four Rompe Pecho brands above. Efficient Laboratories said back in January 2020 that consuming the contaminated medicine could result in vomiting and diarrhea. That's the initial Rompe Pecho recall that the drugmaker expanded a few days ago to include the new lots above. 

 The company says it distributed the Rompe Pecho products in the recall nationwide to wholesalers and retailers. The lot numbers and expiration dates are on the bottom of the cartons containing the recalled cold and flu drugs. 
  

Customers who have Rompe Pecho EX, Rompe Pecho CF, Rompe Pecho DM, or Rompe Pecho MAX should discard their supply if it's part of the lots in the recall. 

 If you've experienced any issues after taking the cold and flu drug in the recall, you should contact your doctor. 

 You should check out the full press release at this link[3], which contains contact information for Efficient Laboratories and the FDA. Also, make sure you go through the original Rompe Pecho flu drug recall from January 2020[4]. The current drug recall is an expansion of that action. 
 [ 1]: https://bgr.com/lifestyle/critical-recall-top-covid-19-drug-recalled-for-the-first-time-read-this-now/ [ 2]: https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts/efficient-laboratories-inc-expands-voluntary-nationwide-recall-consumers-include-twelve-additional [ 3]: https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts/efficient-laboratories-inc-expands-voluntary-nationwide-recall-consumers-include-twelve-additional [ 4]: https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts/efficient-laboratories-inc-issues-voluntary-nationwide-recall-rompe-pecho-ex-rompe-pecho-cf-and 
The views expressed in any and all content distributed by Newstex and its re-distributors (collectively, the "Newstex Authoritative Content") are solely those of the respective author(s) and not necessarily the views of Newstex or its re-distributors. Stories from such authors are provided "AS IS," with no warranties, and confer no rights. The material and information provided in Newstex Authoritative Content are for general information only and should not, in any respect, be relied on as professional advice. Newstex Authoritative Content is not "read and approved" before it is posted. Accordingly, neither Newstex nor its re-distributors make any claims, promises or guarantees about the accuracy, completeness, or adequacy of the information contained therein or linked to from such content, nor do they take responsibility for any aspect of such content. The Newstex Authoritative Content shall be construed as author-based content and commentary. Accordingly, no warranties or other guarantees are offered as to the quality of the opinions, commentary or anything else appearing in such Newstex Authoritative Content. Newstex and its re-distributors expressly reserve the right to delete stories at its and their sole discretion.
 Load-Date: December 16, 2021

 

End of Document


Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up
NBC - 3 WSAV (Savannah, GA)
June 16, 2023 Friday

 Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 WSAV, Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc. 
Section: NATIONAL NEWS
Length: 292 words
Byline: Delaney Murray
Body




LA VERGNE, Tenn. (WRIC) – The Harvard Drug Group has recalled a single lot of the drugs Dronabinol and Ziprasidone Hydrochloride after labels on the two drugs were mixed up.
During the distribution process, it was discovered that cartons labeled as Ziprasidone Hydrochloride actually contained packages labeled as and containing Dronabinol, according to the Food and Drug Administration. 
Ziprasidone Hydrochloride is used for the treatment of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, while Dronabinol is frequently used to treat nausea, vomiting and loss of appetite in chemotherapy and AIDS patients. 
Patients who mistakenly take a dose of Dronabinol instead of Ziprasidone Hydrochloride can experience worsening symptoms of bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, including agitation, aggression, delirium and self-harm. Older people may be "particularly at risk." 
"Taking an unexpected dose of Dronabinol may cause mental and cognitive effects that result in impairment of mental and/or physical abilities," the FDA stated. "This can include worsening of symptoms in patients with mental illness disorders and limitation of patients' abilities to safely complete hazardous activities." 
The Harvard Drug Group specifically recalled all 2.5mg Dronabinol Capsules and all 20 mg Ziprasidone Hydrochloride Capsules labeled with Lot T04769. 
The group has not received any reports of patients experiencing adverse symptoms related to the recall, the FDA said. 
Anyone with questions about the recall can contact Sedgwick, Inc. by phone at 1-888-759-6904 or by email address harvarddrug6068@sedgwick.com 
Patients should contact their doctor or healthcare provider if they have experienced any problems that may be related to taking Dronabinol or Ziprasidone Hydrochloride.
 Load-Date: June 17, 2023

 

End of Document


Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up
CBS - 3 WREG (Memphis, Tennessee)
June 16, 2023 Friday

 Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 Local TV LLC 
Section: NATION & WORLD
Length: 292 words
Byline: Delaney Murray
Body




LA VERGNE, Tenn. (WRIC) – The Harvard Drug Group has recalled a single lot of the drugs Dronabinol and Ziprasidone Hydrochloride after labels on the two drugs were mixed up.
During the distribution process, it was discovered that cartons labeled as Ziprasidone Hydrochloride actually contained packages labeled as and containing Dronabinol, according to the Food and Drug Administration. 
Ziprasidone Hydrochloride is used for the treatment of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, while Dronabinol is frequently used to treat nausea, vomiting and loss of appetite in chemotherapy and AIDS patients. 
Patients who mistakenly take a dose of Dronabinol instead of Ziprasidone Hydrochloride can experience worsening symptoms of bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, including agitation, aggression, delirium and self-harm. Older people may be "particularly at risk." 
"Taking an unexpected dose of Dronabinol may cause mental and cognitive effects that result in impairment of mental and/or physical abilities," the FDA stated. "This can include worsening of symptoms in patients with mental illness disorders and limitation of patients' abilities to safely complete hazardous activities." 
The Harvard Drug Group specifically recalled all 2.5mg Dronabinol Capsules and all 20 mg Ziprasidone Hydrochloride Capsules labeled with Lot T04769. 
The group has not received any reports of patients experiencing adverse symptoms related to the recall, the FDA said. 
Anyone with questions about the recall can contact Sedgwick, Inc. by phone at 1-888-759-6904 or by email address harvarddrug6068@sedgwick.com 
Patients should contact their doctor or healthcare provider if they have experienced any problems that may be related to taking Dronabinol or Ziprasidone Hydrochloride.
 Load-Date: June 17, 2023

 

End of Document


Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up
CBS - 12 WJTV (Jackson, Mississippi)
June 16, 2023 Friday

 Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 WJTV, Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc. 
Section: LIVING LOCAL
Length: 292 words
Byline: Delaney Murray
Body




LA VERGNE, Tenn. (WRIC) – The Harvard Drug Group has recalled a single lot of the drugs Dronabinol and Ziprasidone Hydrochloride after labels on the two drugs were mixed up.
During the distribution process, it was discovered that cartons labeled as Ziprasidone Hydrochloride actually contained packages labeled as and containing Dronabinol, according to the Food and Drug Administration. 
Ziprasidone Hydrochloride is used for the treatment of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, while Dronabinol is frequently used to treat nausea, vomiting and loss of appetite in chemotherapy and AIDS patients. 
Patients who mistakenly take a dose of Dronabinol instead of Ziprasidone Hydrochloride can experience worsening symptoms of bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, including agitation, aggression, delirium and self-harm. Older people may be "particularly at risk." 
"Taking an unexpected dose of Dronabinol may cause mental and cognitive effects that result in impairment of mental and/or physical abilities," the FDA stated. "This can include worsening of symptoms in patients with mental illness disorders and limitation of patients' abilities to safely complete hazardous activities." 
The Harvard Drug Group specifically recalled all 2.5mg Dronabinol Capsules and all 20 mg Ziprasidone Hydrochloride Capsules labeled with Lot T04769. 
The group has not received any reports of patients experiencing adverse symptoms related to the recall, the FDA said. 
Anyone with questions about the recall can contact Sedgwick, Inc. by phone at 1-888-759-6904 or by email address harvarddrug6068@sedgwick.com 
Patients should contact their doctor or healthcare provider if they have experienced any problems that may be related to taking Dronabinol or Ziprasidone Hydrochloride.
 Load-Date: June 19, 2023

 

End of Document


Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up
ABC - 6 WJBF (Augusta, Georgia)
June 16, 2023 Friday

 Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 WJBF, Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc. 
Section: HEALTH
Length: 292 words
Byline: Delaney Murray
Body




LA VERGNE, Tenn. (WRIC) – The Harvard Drug Group has recalled a single lot of the drugs Dronabinol and Ziprasidone Hydrochloride after labels on the two drugs were mixed up.
During the distribution process, it was discovered that cartons labeled as Ziprasidone Hydrochloride actually contained packages labeled as and containing Dronabinol, according to the Food and Drug Administration. 
Ziprasidone Hydrochloride is used for the treatment of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, while Dronabinol is frequently used to treat nausea, vomiting and loss of appetite in chemotherapy and AIDS patients. 
Patients who mistakenly take a dose of Dronabinol instead of Ziprasidone Hydrochloride can experience worsening symptoms of bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, including agitation, aggression, delirium and self-harm. Older people may be "particularly at risk." 
"Taking an unexpected dose of Dronabinol may cause mental and cognitive effects that result in impairment of mental and/or physical abilities," the FDA stated. "This can include worsening of symptoms in patients with mental illness disorders and limitation of patients' abilities to safely complete hazardous activities." 
The Harvard Drug Group specifically recalled all 2.5mg Dronabinol Capsules and all 20 mg Ziprasidone Hydrochloride Capsules labeled with Lot T04769. 
The group has not received any reports of patients experiencing adverse symptoms related to the recall, the FDA said. 
Anyone with questions about the recall can contact Sedgwick, Inc. by phone at 1-888-759-6904 or by email address harvarddrug6068@sedgwick.com 
Patients should contact their doctor or healthcare provider if they have experienced any problems that may be related to taking Dronabinol or Ziprasidone Hydrochloride.
 Load-Date: June 16, 2023

 

End of Document


Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up
FOX - 4 WDAF (Kansas City, Missouri)
June 16, 2023 Friday

 Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 WDAF 
Section: NATIONAL
Length: 292 words
Byline: Delaney Murray
Body




LA VERGNE, Tenn. (WRIC) – The Harvard Drug Group has recalled a single lot of the drugs Dronabinol and Ziprasidone Hydrochloride after labels on the two drugs were mixed up.
During the distribution process, it was discovered that cartons labeled as Ziprasidone Hydrochloride actually contained packages labeled as and containing Dronabinol, according to the Food and Drug Administration. 
Ziprasidone Hydrochloride is used for the treatment of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, while Dronabinol is frequently used to treat nausea, vomiting and loss of appetite in chemotherapy and AIDS patients. 
Patients who mistakenly take a dose of Dronabinol instead of Ziprasidone Hydrochloride can experience worsening symptoms of bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, including agitation, aggression, delirium and self-harm. Older people may be "particularly at risk." 
"Taking an unexpected dose of Dronabinol may cause mental and cognitive effects that result in impairment of mental and/or physical abilities," the FDA stated. "This can include worsening of symptoms in patients with mental illness disorders and limitation of patients' abilities to safely complete hazardous activities." 
The Harvard Drug Group specifically recalled all 2.5mg Dronabinol Capsules and all 20 mg Ziprasidone Hydrochloride Capsules labeled with Lot T04769. 
The group has not received any reports of patients experiencing adverse symptoms related to the recall, the FDA said. 
Anyone with questions about the recall can contact Sedgwick, Inc. by phone at 1-888-759-6904 or by email address harvarddrug6068@sedgwick.com 
Patients should contact their doctor or healthcare provider if they have experienced any problems that may be related to taking Dronabinol or Ziprasidone Hydrochloride.
 Load-Date: June 17, 2023

 

End of Document


Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up
FOX - 8 WJW (Cleveland, Ohio)
June 16, 2023 Friday

 Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 WJW 
Section: RECALLS & SAFETY ALERTS
Length: 292 words
Byline: Delaney Murray
Body




LA VERGNE, Tenn. (WRIC) – The Harvard Drug Group has recalled a single lot of the drugs Dronabinol and Ziprasidone Hydrochloride after labels on the two drugs were mixed up.
During the distribution process, it was discovered that cartons labeled as Ziprasidone Hydrochloride actually contained packages labeled as and containing Dronabinol, according to the Food and Drug Administration. 
Ziprasidone Hydrochloride is used for the treatment of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, while Dronabinol is frequently used to treat nausea, vomiting and loss of appetite in chemotherapy and AIDS patients. 
Patients who mistakenly take a dose of Dronabinol instead of Ziprasidone Hydrochloride can experience worsening symptoms of bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, including agitation, aggression, delirium and self-harm. Older people may be "particularly at risk." 
"Taking an unexpected dose of Dronabinol may cause mental and cognitive effects that result in impairment of mental and/or physical abilities," the FDA stated. "This can include worsening of symptoms in patients with mental illness disorders and limitation of patients' abilities to safely complete hazardous activities." 
The Harvard Drug Group specifically recalled all 2.5mg Dronabinol Capsules and all 20 mg Ziprasidone Hydrochloride Capsules labeled with Lot T04769. 
The group has not received any reports of patients experiencing adverse symptoms related to the recall, the FDA said. 
Anyone with questions about the recall can contact Sedgwick, Inc. by phone at 1-888-759-6904 or by email address harvarddrug6068@sedgwick.com 
Patients should contact their doctor or healthcare provider if they have experienced any problems that may be related to taking Dronabinol or Ziprasidone Hydrochloride.
 Load-Date: June 17, 2023

 

End of Document


Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up
CBS - 11 WJHL (Johnson City, Tennessee)
June 16, 2023 Friday

 Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 WJHL, Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc. 
Section: NATIONAL
Length: 292 words
Byline: Delaney Murray
Body




LA VERGNE, Tenn. (WRIC) – The Harvard Drug Group has recalled a single lot of the drugs Dronabinol and Ziprasidone Hydrochloride after labels on the two drugs were mixed up.
During the distribution process, it was discovered that cartons labeled as Ziprasidone Hydrochloride actually contained packages labeled as and containing Dronabinol, according to the Food and Drug Administration. 
Ziprasidone Hydrochloride is used for the treatment of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, while Dronabinol is frequently used to treat nausea, vomiting and loss of appetite in chemotherapy and AIDS patients. 
Patients who mistakenly take a dose of Dronabinol instead of Ziprasidone Hydrochloride can experience worsening symptoms of bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, including agitation, aggression, delirium and self-harm. Older people may be "particularly at risk." 
"Taking an unexpected dose of Dronabinol may cause mental and cognitive effects that result in impairment of mental and/or physical abilities," the FDA stated. "This can include worsening of symptoms in patients with mental illness disorders and limitation of patients' abilities to safely complete hazardous activities." 
The Harvard Drug Group specifically recalled all 2.5mg Dronabinol Capsules and all 20 mg Ziprasidone Hydrochloride Capsules labeled with Lot T04769. 
The group has not received any reports of patients experiencing adverse symptoms related to the recall, the FDA said. 
Anyone with questions about the recall can contact Sedgwick, Inc. by phone at 1-888-759-6904 or by email address harvarddrug6068@sedgwick.com 
Patients should contact their doctor or healthcare provider if they have experienced any problems that may be related to taking Dronabinol or Ziprasidone Hydrochloride.
 Load-Date: June 17, 2023

 

End of Document


Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up
FOX - 31 KDVR (Denver)
June 16, 2023 Friday

 Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 Local TV LLC 
Section: NATIONAL/WORLD NEWS
Length: 292 words
Byline: Delaney Murray
Body




LA VERGNE, Tenn. (WRIC) – The Harvard Drug Group has recalled a single lot of the drugs Dronabinol and Ziprasidone Hydrochloride after labels on the two drugs were mixed up.
During the distribution process, it was discovered that cartons labeled as Ziprasidone Hydrochloride actually contained packages labeled as and containing Dronabinol, according to the Food and Drug Administration. 
Ziprasidone Hydrochloride is used for the treatment of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, while Dronabinol is frequently used to treat nausea, vomiting and loss of appetite in chemotherapy and AIDS patients. 
Patients who mistakenly take a dose of Dronabinol instead of Ziprasidone Hydrochloride can experience worsening symptoms of bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, including agitation, aggression, delirium and self-harm. Older people may be "particularly at risk." 
"Taking an unexpected dose of Dronabinol may cause mental and cognitive effects that result in impairment of mental and/or physical abilities," the FDA stated. "This can include worsening of symptoms in patients with mental illness disorders and limitation of patients' abilities to safely complete hazardous activities." 
The Harvard Drug Group specifically recalled all 2.5mg Dronabinol Capsules and all 20 mg Ziprasidone Hydrochloride Capsules labeled with Lot T04769. 
The group has not received any reports of patients experiencing adverse symptoms related to the recall, the FDA said. 
Anyone with questions about the recall can contact Sedgwick, Inc. by phone at 1-888-759-6904 or by email address harvarddrug6068@sedgwick.com 
Patients should contact their doctor or healthcare provider if they have experienced any problems that may be related to taking Dronabinol or Ziprasidone Hydrochloride.
 Load-Date: June 17, 2023

 

End of Document


Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up
CBS - 3 WRBL (Columbus, GA)
June 16, 2023 Friday

 Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 WRBL, Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc. 
Section: NATIONAL
Length: 292 words
Byline: Delaney Murray
Body




LA VERGNE, Tenn. (WRIC) – The Harvard Drug Group has recalled a single lot of the drugs Dronabinol and Ziprasidone Hydrochloride after labels on the two drugs were mixed up.
During the distribution process, it was discovered that cartons labeled as Ziprasidone Hydrochloride actually contained packages labeled as and containing Dronabinol, according to the Food and Drug Administration. 
Ziprasidone Hydrochloride is used for the treatment of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, while Dronabinol is frequently used to treat nausea, vomiting and loss of appetite in chemotherapy and AIDS patients. 
Patients who mistakenly take a dose of Dronabinol instead of Ziprasidone Hydrochloride can experience worsening symptoms of bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, including agitation, aggression, delirium and self-harm. Older people may be "particularly at risk." 
"Taking an unexpected dose of Dronabinol may cause mental and cognitive effects that result in impairment of mental and/or physical abilities," the FDA stated. "This can include worsening of symptoms in patients with mental illness disorders and limitation of patients' abilities to safely complete hazardous activities." 
The Harvard Drug Group specifically recalled all 2.5mg Dronabinol Capsules and all 20 mg Ziprasidone Hydrochloride Capsules labeled with Lot T04769. 
The group has not received any reports of patients experiencing adverse symptoms related to the recall, the FDA said. 
Anyone with questions about the recall can contact Sedgwick, Inc. by phone at 1-888-759-6904 or by email address harvarddrug6068@sedgwick.com 
Patients should contact their doctor or healthcare provider if they have experienced any problems that may be related to taking Dronabinol or Ziprasidone Hydrochloride.
 Load-Date: June 17, 2023

 

End of Document


DeLauro Celebrates FDA Mandatory Drug Recall Authority in the America COMPETES Act
Congressional Documents and Publications
February 4, 2022

 Copyright 2022 Federal Information and News Dispatch, Inc.
Section: U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES DOCUMENTS
Length: 554 words
Body




Congresswoman Rosa DeLauro
February 4, 2022
DeLauro Celebrates FDA Mandatory Drug Recall Authority in the America COMPETES Act
WASHINGTON, D.C. -- House Appropriations Committee Chair Rosa DeLauro (D-CT-03) today celebrated the inclusion of a provision in the America COMPETES Act to give the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) mandatory recall authority over drug products.
"For years, I have fought to advance legislation - the Recall Unsafe Drugs Act - giving the FDA mandatory recall authority over drugs so the Agency can fully use its regulatory authority to protect public health," said Congresswoman DeLauro. "I am pleased the America COMPETES Act includes this expanded authority; authority the Agency already has over foods, medical devices, and biological products. FDA's lack of mandatory drug recall authority has real-world consequences. Even if dangerous products that pose serious risks to consumers are discovered, the Agency can only request a recall. Companies can - and do - refuse voluntary recalls. That is unconscionable and puts people at risk. That is why I am committed to ensuring FDA receives this expanded authority and has the resources to mandate recalls of unsafe drugs."
"At Valisure, we applaud Congresswoman Rosa DeLauro for tirelessly advocating for the FDA to acquire mandatory recall authority over drugs and, ultimately, add this matter to the COMPETES Act," said Chief Executive Officer of Valisure David Light. "We strongly support efforts that can improve the quality of the U.S. drug supply, which is heavily reliant on a complex, global, and increasingly vulnerable supply chain. We hope the FDA will utilize its new authority in conjunction with the proven impact of independent testing, which has identified multiple adulterated products and industry-wide quality concerns. The combination of increased vigilance and independent quality assurance throughout the supply chain with enhanced regulatory authority has the potential to significantly diminish the unnecessary risk to consumers from contaminated or otherwise adulterated products. We encourage the FDA and Congress to continue taking actions in support of improving drug quality and the robustness of the global supply chain."
DeLauro first introduced legislation to give FDA mandatory recall authority over drugs in 2017 following the death of 10 children associated with Hyland's teething tablets. Overall, the teething tablets were linked to more than 400 adverse event reports in children including death, seizures, shortness of breath, and tremors. Despite the FDA issuing several safety warnings on the dangers of homeopathic teething products, the manufacturer refused to recall its products. That refusal left deadly products in the homes of unsuspecting parents who were still, unknowingly, giving it to their children.
Recently, DeLauro secured similar language to give FDA mandatory recall authority over drugs in the Fiscal Year 2021 Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies spending bill. That summer, a foreign manufacturer of hand sanitizers refused a voluntary recall request after the FDA discovered they were potentially contaminated with methanol, a toxic, life-threatening substance that can be absorbed through the skin or accidentally ingested by children.
 Load-Date: February 5, 2022

 

End of Document


Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up
NBC - 4 WCMH (Columbus, Ohio)
June 16, 2023 Friday

 Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 WCMH, Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc. 
Section: NATIONAL
Length: 298 words
Byline: Delaney Murray
Body




LA VERGNE, Tenn. (WRIC) – The Harvard Drug Group has recalled a single lot of the drugs Dronabinol and Ziprasidone Hydrochloride after labels on the two drugs were mixed up.
During the distribution process, it was discovered that cartons labeled as Ziprasidone Hydrochloride actually contained packages labeled as and containing Dronabinol, according to the Food and Drug Administration. 
Ziprasidone Hydrochloride is used for the treatment of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, while Dronabinol is frequently used to treat nausea, vomiting and loss of appetite in chemotherapy and AIDS patients. 
Patients who mistakenly take a dose of Dronabinol instead of Ziprasidone Hydrochloride can experience worsening symptoms of bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, including agitation, aggression, delirium and self-harm. Older people may be "particularly at risk." 
"Taking an unexpected dose of Dronabinol may cause mental and cognitive effects that result in impairment of mental and/or physical abilities," the FDA stated. "This can include worsening of symptoms in patients with mental illness disorders and limitation of patients' abilities to safely complete hazardous activities." 
The Harvard Drug Group specifically recalled all 2.5mg Dronabinol Capsules and all 20 mg Ziprasidone Hydrochloride Capsules labeled with Lot T04769. 
The group has not received any reports of patients experiencing adverse symptoms related to the recall, the FDA said. 
Anyone with questions about the recall can contact Sedgwick, Inc. by phone at 1-888-759-6904 or by email address harvarddrug6068@sedgwick.com 
Patients should contact their doctor or healthcare provider if they have experienced any problems that may be related to taking Dronabinol or Ziprasidone Hydrochloride. 
Close Modal 
Suggest a Correction
 Load-Date: June 17, 2023

 

End of Document


Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up
FOX - 2 KTVI (St. Louis)
June 16, 2023 Friday

 Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 Local TV LLC 
Section: NATIONAL
Length: 304 words
Byline: Delaney Murray
Body




LA VERGNE, Tenn. (WRIC) – The Harvard Drug Group has recalled a single lot of the drugs Dronabinol and Ziprasidone Hydrochloride after labels on the two drugs were mixed up.
During the distribution process, it was discovered that cartons labeled as Ziprasidone Hydrochloride actually contained packages labeled as and containing Dronabinol, according to the Food and Drug Administration. 
Ziprasidone Hydrochloride is used for the treatment of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, while Dronabinol is frequently used to treat nausea, vomiting and loss of appetite in chemotherapy and AIDS patients. 
Strawberry products sold in 32 states recalled over Hepatitis A risks 
Patients who mistakenly take a dose of Dronabinol instead of Ziprasidone Hydrochloride can experience worsening symptoms of bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, including agitation, aggression, delirium and self-harm. Older people may be "particularly at risk." 
"Taking an unexpected dose of Dronabinol may cause mental and cognitive effects that result in impairment of mental and/or physical abilities," the FDA stated. "This can include worsening of symptoms in patients with mental illness disorders and limitation of patients' abilities to safely complete hazardous activities." 
The Harvard Drug Group specifically recalled all 2.5mg Dronabinol Capsules and all 20 mg Ziprasidone Hydrochloride Capsules labeled with Lot T04769. 
The group has not received any reports of patients experiencing adverse symptoms related to the recall, the FDA said. 
Anyone with questions about the recall can contact Sedgwick, Inc. by phone at 1-888-759-6904 or by email address harvarddrug6068@sedgwick.com 
Patients should contact their doctor or healthcare provider if they have experienced any problems that may be related to taking Dronabinol or Ziprasidone Hydrochloride.
 Load-Date: June 17, 2023

 

End of Document


Schizophrenia and nausea drugs recalled after labeling mix-up
FOX - 8 WGHP (High Point, Greensboro, Winston-Salem, North Carolina)
June 16, 2023 Friday

 Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 Local TV LLC 
Section: HEALTH NEWS
Length: 292 words
Byline: Delaney Murray
Body




LA VERGNE, Tenn. (WRIC) – The Harvard Drug Group has recalled a single lot of the drugs Dronabinol and Ziprasidone Hydrochloride after labels on the two drugs were mixed up.
During the distribution process, it was discovered that cartons labeled as Ziprasidone Hydrochloride actually contained packages labeled as and containing Dronabinol, according to the Food and Drug Administration. 
Ziprasidone Hydrochloride is used for the treatment of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, while Dronabinol is frequently used to treat nausea, vomiting and loss of appetite in chemotherapy and AIDS patients. 
Patients who mistakenly take a dose of Dronabinol instead of Ziprasidone Hydrochloride can experience worsening symptoms of bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, including agitation, aggression, delirium and self-harm. Older people may be "particularly at risk." 
"Taking an unexpected dose of Dronabinol may cause mental and cognitive effects that result in impairment of mental and/or physical abilities," the FDA stated. "This can include worsening of symptoms in patients with mental illness disorders and limitation of patients' abilities to safely complete hazardous activities." 
The Harvard Drug Group specifically recalled all 2.5mg Dronabinol Capsules and all 20 mg Ziprasidone Hydrochloride Capsules labeled with Lot T04769. 
The group has not received any reports of patients experiencing adverse symptoms related to the recall, the FDA said. 
Anyone with questions about the recall can contact Sedgwick, Inc. by phone at 1-888-759-6904 or by email address harvarddrug6068@sedgwick.com 
Patients should contact their doctor or healthcare provider if they have experienced any problems that may be related to taking Dronabinol or Ziprasidone Hydrochloride.
 Load-Date: June 17, 2023

 

End of Document


Baxter begins Class I recall of drug dose calculation software
FierceBiotech Medical Devices
July 26, 2022

 Copyright 2022 Questex Media Group LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: ARTICLE
Length: 418 words
Byline: Andrea Park
Highlight: So far, Baxter and the FDA have reported five complaints linked to the software defect, with no patient injuries or deaths reported.
Body




Technology has taken over some of the most tedious tasks in healthcare, much to the relief of overworked clinicians—but that doesn't mean these new software programs should be treated as infallible.
Case in point: A recent recall from Baxter International was hit with the FDA's most serious rating this week, denoting the risk that the software flaw at the core of the recall could lead to serious injury or death.
That flaw was discovered in Baxter's Abacus software, which is designed to help hospitals streamline their liquid medication mixing. The system calculates the appropriate amounts of medications for the drug compounding process—based on preset parameters specific to each facility's prescribing practices—then automatically sends those instructions to a connected compounder and prints out unique labels for each dose.
But, according to the FDA's safety notice, an issue within the software's design could cause those labels to be printed with incorrect information.
The improper labeling may occur if a user adjusts one of the label templates offered by the system, whether incorrectly or completely unintentionally, the FDA said.
Whatever the cause, if a label printed with the wrong patient name, drug name or dosage value is placed on a liquid medication bag, the compounded medication could be administered to the wrong person, potentially causing serious harm to high-risk patients.
So far, Baxter and the FDA have cited five complaints linked to the software defect, with no patient injuries or deaths reported.
The recall spans nine iterations of the Abacus system—three versions of the software, each with three separate configurations—that were distributed between May 2013 and September 2019. In total, it affects just over 1,100 customers located around the world.
Those customers may continue using the software, Baxter said, but should follow all instructions in the Abacus user and configuration guides when creating an order and should refrain from making changes to the included label templates. If any changes must be made, facilities should contact Baxter's technical support team.
The company also recommended that healthcare providers implement pharmacy and nursing checks throughout the compounding process and have a pharmacist review all medications that were mixed and labeled using the technology.
Meanwhile, according to its original June 22 recall notice, Baxter is working on developing a software upgrade that will eliminate the ability to alter the Abacus label templates.
 Load-Date: July 28, 2022

 

End of Document


DELAURO CELEBRATES FDA MANDATORY DRUG RECALL AUTHORITY IN THE AMERICA COMPETES ACT
US Fed News
February 4, 2022 Friday 9:32 AM  EST

 Copyright 2022 HT Media Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Length: 572 words
Body




WASHINGTON, Feb. 4 -- Rep. Rosa L. DeLauro, D-Conn. (3rd CD), issued the following press release statement:
WASHINGTON, D.C. - House Appropriations Committee Chair Rosa DeLauro (D-CT-03) today celebrated the inclusion of a provision in the America COMPETES Act to give the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) mandatory recall authority over drug products.
"For years, I have fought to advance legislation - the Recall Unsafe Drugs Act - giving the FDA mandatory recall authority over drugs so the Agency can fully use its regulatory authority to protect public health," said Congresswoman DeLauro. "I am pleased the America COMPETES Act includes this expanded authority; authority the Agency already has over foods, medical devices, and biological products. FDA's lack of mandatory drug recall authority has real-world consequences. Even if dangerous products that pose serious risks to consumers are discovered, the Agency can only request a recall. Companies can - and do - refuse voluntary recalls. That is unconscionable and puts people at risk. That is why I am committed to ensuring FDA receives this expanded authority and has the resources to mandate recalls of unsafe drugs."
"At Valisure, we applaud Congresswoman Rosa DeLauro for tirelessly advocating for the FDA to acquire mandatory recall authority over drugs and, ultimately, add this matter to the COMPETES Act," said Chief Executive Officer of Valisure David Light. "We strongly support efforts that can improve the quality of the U.S. drug supply, which is heavily reliant on a complex, global, and increasingly vulnerable supply chain. We hope the FDA will utilize its new authority in conjunction with the proven impact of independent testing, which has identified multiple adulterated products and industry-wide quality concerns. The combination of increased vigilance and independent quality assurance throughout the supply chain with enhanced regulatory authority has the potential to significantly diminish the unnecessary risk to consumers from contaminated or otherwise adulterated products. We encourage the FDA and Congress to continue taking actions in support of improving drug quality and the robustness of the global supply chain."
DeLauro first introduced legislation to give FDA mandatory recall authority over drugs in 2017 following the death of 10 children associated with Hyland's teething tablets. Overall, the teething tablets were linked to more than 400 adverse event reports in children including death, seizures, shortness of breath, and tremors. Despite the FDA issuing several safety warnings on the dangers of homeopathic teething products, the manufacturer refused to recall its products. That refusal left deadly products in the homes of unsuspecting parents who were still, unknowingly, giving it to their children.
Recently, DeLauro secured similar language to give FDA mandatory recall authority over drugs in the Fiscal Year 2021 Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies spending bill. That summer, a foreign manufacturer of hand sanitizers refused a voluntary recall request after the FDA discovered they were potentially contaminated with methanol, a toxic, life-threatening substance that can be absorbed through the skin or accidentally ingested by children. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
 Load-Date: February 5, 2022

 

End of Document


DELAURO CELEBRATES FDA MANDATORY DRUG RECALL AUTHORITY IN THE AMERICA COMPETES ACT
States News Service
February 4, 2022 Friday

 Copyright 2022 States News Service
Length: 543 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: WASHINGTON, D.C. 
Body




The following information was released by the office of Connecticut Rep. Rosa DeLauro:
House Appropriations Committee Chair Rosa DeLauro (D-CT-03) today celebrated the inclusion of a provision in the America COMPETES Act to give the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) mandatory recall authority over drug products.
"For years, I have fought to advance legislation the Recall Unsafe Drugs Act giving the FDA mandatory recall authority over drugs so the Agency can fully use its regulatory authority to protect public health," said Congresswoman DeLauro. "I am pleased the America COMPETES Act includes this expanded authority; authority the Agency already has over foods, medical devices, and biological products. FDA's lack of mandatory drug recall authority has real-world consequences. Even if dangerous products that pose serious risks to consumers are discovered, the Agency can only request a recall. Companies can and do refuse voluntary recalls. That is unconscionable and puts people at risk. That is why I am committed to ensuring FDA receives this expanded authority and has the resources to mandate recalls of unsafe drugs."
"At Valisure, we applaud Congresswoman Rosa DeLauro for tirelessly advocating for the FDA to acquire mandatory recall authority over drugs and, ultimately, add this matter to the COMPETES Act," said Chief Executive Officer of Valisure David Light . "We strongly support efforts that can improve the quality of the U.S. drug supply, which is heavily reliant on a complex, global, and increasingly vulnerable supply chain. We hope the FDA will utilize its new authority in conjunction with the proven impact of independent testing, which has identified multiple adulterated products and industry-wide quality concerns. The combination of increased vigilance and independent quality assurance throughout the supply chain with enhanced regulatory authority has the potential to significantly diminish the unnecessary risk to consumers from contaminated or otherwise adulterated products. We encourage the FDA and Congress to continue taking actions in support of improving drug quality and the robustness of the global supply chain."
DeLauro first introduced legislation to give FDA mandatory recall authority over drugs in 2017 following the death of 10 children associated with Hyland's teething tablets. Overall, the teething tablets were linked to more than 400 adverse event reports in children including death, seizures, shortness of breath, and tremors. Despite the FDA issuing several safety warnings on the dangers of homeopathic teething products, the manufacturer refused to recall its products. That refusal left deadly products in the homes of unsuspecting parents who were still, unknowingly, giving it to their children.
Recently, DeLauro secured similar language to give FDA mandatory recall authority over drugs in the Fiscal Year 2021 Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies spending bill. That summer, a foreign manufacturer of hand sanitizers refused a voluntary recall request after the FDA discovered they were potentially contaminated with methanol, a toxic, life-threatening substance that can be absorbed through the skin or accidentally ingested by children.
 Load-Date: February 5, 2022

 

End of Document


Dr. Reddy's Recalls Prescription Drug Blister Packages
RTT News (United States)
February 26, 2021 Friday

 Copyright 2021 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2021 RTT News All Rights Reserved
Length: 276 words
Byline: editorial@rttnews.com,  (RTT Staff Writer)
Body




       Dr. Reddy's Laboratories, Inc. is recalling about 21,400 blister packages of certain prescription medications citing the risk of poisoning to children, the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission said.
 The recall involves various medications, such as Imatinib Mesylate Tablets 100 mg and 400 mg; Pregabalin Capsules 50 mg, 75 mg, 100 mg, and 150 mg; Sevelamer Carbonate Tablets 800 mg; as well as Tadalafil Tablets 5 mg and 20 mg.
 The products, manufactured in India, are prescription medications that were labeled and distributed by Dr. Reddy's for institutional use only.
 The name and strength of the medication, "For Institutional Use only," "Rx Only," lot number and expiration date are printed on the outside of the package as well as on the individual blister units.
 Beginning in 2018, Dr. Reddy's sold the recalled medications to wholesalers, who then distributed these to retail pharmacies. These medications could have been sold to consumers at retail pharmacies in the United States at prices varying based on quantities prescribed, health insurance terms, and other factors.
 According to the agency, the packaging of the products is not child resistant and can pose a risk of poisoning if the contents are swallowed by young children.
 However, there were no reports of incidents or injuries to date.
 Consumers are urged to store the recalled medications in a safe location out of reach of children and contact the firm for a full refund.
 In similar incidents citing risk of poisoning to children, Phoenix, Arizona-based Scalpa Inc. in mid-January called back about 10,000 units of Scalpa Numb Maximum Strength Topical Anesthetic Cream.        
 Load-Date: February 27, 2021

 

End of Document


Kathy Griffin Recalls Drug Addiction in Response to Hunter Biden Voicemail
Newsweek.com
October 12, 2022 Wednesday 5:22 AM EST

 Copyright © 2022 Newsweek Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 686 words
Byline: Ryan Smith
Highlight: "I'm so grateful to have someone who really loves me and cares like this," Griffin said, in reference to President Joe Biden's leaked voicemail to his son.
Body




Kathy Griffin has recounted the support she received from her husband, Randy Bick, in light of the leaked voicemail that President Joe Biden left for his son, Hunter.
On Monday, Fox News' Sean Hannity aired the voicemail that had been obtained by U.K newspaper the Daily Mail and was reportedly recorded on October 15, 2018—three days after Hunter Biden allegedly made a false statement while purchasing a gun.
In the voicemail, Joe Biden said: "It's Dad. I called to tell you I love you. I love you more than the whole world, pal. You gotta get some help. I know you don't know what to do. I don't either. I'm here, no matter what you need... I love you."
Hunter Biden, 52, has been open about his history of drug use and his struggles with addiction, while his father has said he's proud of his son for overcoming his issues.
After the audio was shared on Twitter, Molly Jong-Fast, 44, a contributing writer for Vogue and The Atlantic, wrote about her own battles on Tuesday.
"I got sober when I was 19," she tweeted while reposting the Biden audio. "I used to get calls like this from my family and friends."
Suddenly Susan star Griffin, 61, responded to Jong-Fast's comment by opening up about her own experience with prescription-pill addiction.
"I kept my prescription pill addiction... secret from my family," the comedian tweeted. "When I was really messed up, I would kick my husband out of the house & he would call me and leave me messages like this. I'm so grateful to have someone who really loves me and cares like this. BIG help in recovery."
Following her lung-cancer diagnosis last year, Griffin recalled a dark time in her life, when she wrote in a Twitter post: "The last time I was in a hospital was in June 2020 when I tried to take my life and overdosed on prescription pills.
"With over a year clean and drug free, I now know I can do this and anything I want without those devil pills," added Griffin, who is now cancer-free. "Y'know what? I fear drugs and addiction more than I fear cancer. So, I think I'll be ok."
The Washington Post said on Thursday that federal agents investigating Hunter Biden believe there may be enough evidence to bring charges against him for his 2018 gun purchase, as well as alleged tax crimes.
His foreign business dealings could also become the subject of congressional investigations if Republicans take control of the House of Representatives in this year's midterm elections.
At the time that Hannity played the Biden audio, the Fox News host politicized the matter by saying that one could "replace the name Biden with Trump and imagine how the mob and the media would be covering all of this."
Some social-media users were critical of Hannity for airing the voicemail and defended Joe Biden's comments to his son.
"A parent expressing love and concern for their child is scandalous? Not sure I understand," wrote podcast host Rachel Vindman.
Journalist Aaron Rupar shared a still, showing a quote from the voicemail displayed during Hannity's show and wrote: "what a monster."
Newsweek has reached out to the White House and an attorney for Hunter Biden for comment.
In a statement to The Washington Post on Thursday, Chris Clark, a lawyer for Hunter Biden, accused investigators of leaking information, which he said was a federal felony.
"As is proper and legally required, we believe the prosecutors in this case are diligently and thoroughly weighing not just evidence provided by agents, but also all the other witnesses in this case, including witnesses for the defense," Clark said. "That is the job of the prosecutors. They should not be pressured, rushed, or criticized for doing their job."
The Daily Mail said on Monday that the voicemail had been left on an "abandoned laptop" belonging to Hunter Biden.
He has been a focus of controversy since the 2020 presidential election, with former President Trump taking aim at him during a debate with then-former Vice President Biden.
"My son, like a lot of people ... had a drug problem," Biden said in response to Trump at the time. "He's overtaken it. He's fixed it. He's worked on it. And I'm proud of him."
Link to Image
 Graphic



 
Kathy Griffin comments on Hunter Biden voicemail
Matt Winkelmeyer/Getty Images;/Astrid Stawiarz/Getty Images for Town & Country
Kathy Griffin is pictured left on September 21, 2022, in Beverly Hills, California. Hunter Biden is pictured inset on May 28, 2014, in New York City. Griffin has spoken out about her own struggles with addiction, and the support she received, after a voicemail President Joe Biden left for his son, Hunter Biden, was leaked.
 Load-Date: October 12, 2022

 

End of Document


Dr. Reddy's Recalls Prescription Drug Blister Packages
CE Noticias Financieras English
February 26, 2021 Friday

 Copyright 2021 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2021 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved
Length: 276 words
Body




       Dr. Reddy's Laboratories, Inc. is recalling about 21,400 blister packages of certain prescription medications citing the risk of poisoning to children, the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission said.
 The recall involves various medications, such as Imatinib Mesylate Tablets 100 mg and 400 mg; Pregabalin Capsules 50 mg, 75 mg, 100 mg, and 150 mg; Sevelamer Carbonate Tablets 800 mg; as well as Tadalafil Tablets 5 mg and 20 mg.
 The products, manufactured in India, are prescription medications that were labeled and distributed by Dr. Reddy's for institutional use only.
 The name and strength of the medication, "For Institutional Use only," "Rx Only," lot number and expiration date are printed on the outside of the package as well as on the individual blister units.
 Beginning in 2018, Dr. Reddy's sold the recalled medications to wholesalers, who then distributed these to retail pharmacies. These medications could have been sold to consumers at retail pharmacies in the United States at prices varying based on quantities prescribed, health insurance terms, and other factors.
 According to the agency, the packaging of the products is not child resistant and can pose a risk of poisoning if the contents are swallowed by young children.
 However, there were no reports of incidents or injuries to date.
 Consumers are urged to store the recalled medications in a safe location out of reach of children and contact the firm for a full refund.
 In similar incidents citing risk of poisoning to children, Phoenix, Arizona-based Scalpa Inc. in mid-January called back about 10,000 units of Scalpa Numb Maximum Strength Topical Anesthetic Cream.        
 Load-Date: February 27, 2021

 

End of Document


Dr. Reddy's Recalls Prescription Drug Blister Packages
dpa-AFX International ProFeed
February 26, 2021 Friday 6:15 AM GMT

 Copyright 2021 dpa-AFX Wirtschaftsnachrichten GmbH All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 281 words
Body




       NEW DELHI (dpa-AFX) - Dr. Reddy's Laboratories, Inc. is recalling about 21,400 blister packages of certain prescription medications citing the risk of poisoning to children, the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission said.  The recall involves various medications, such as Imatinib Mesylate Tablets 100 mg and 400 mg; Pregabalin Capsules 50 mg, 75 mg, 100 mg, and 150 mg; Sevelamer Carbonate Tablets 800 mg; as well as Tadalafil Tablets 5 mg and 20 mg.  The products, manufactured in India, are prescription medications that were labeled and distributed by Dr. Reddy's for institutional use only.  The name and strength of the medication, "For Institutional Use only," "Rx Only," lot number and expiration date are printed on the outside of the package as well as on the individual blister units.  Beginning in 2018, Dr. Reddy's sold the recalled medications to wholesalers, who then distributed these to retail pharmacies. These medications could have been sold to consumers at retail pharmacies in the United States at prices varying based on quantities prescribed, health insurance terms, and other factors.  According to the agency, the packaging of the products is not child resistant and can pose a risk of poisoning if the contents are swallowed by young children.  However, there were no reports of incidents or injuries to date.  Consumers are urged to store the recalled medications in a safe location out of reach of children and contact the firm for a full refund.  In similar incidents citing risk of poisoning to children, Phoenix, Arizona-based Scalpa Inc. in mid-January called back about 10,000 units of Scalpa Numb Maximum Strength Topical Anesthetic Cream.      
 Load-Date: February 26, 2021

 

End of Document


Dr. Reddy's Recalls Prescription Drug Blister Packages
Pharma & Healthcare Monitor Worldwide
February 27, 2021 Saturday

 Copyright 2021 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 277 words
Body




Dr. Reddy's Laboratories, Inc. is recalling about 21,400 blister packages of certain prescription medications citing the risk of poisoning to children, the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission said.
The recall involves various medications, such as Imatinib Mesylate Tablets 100 mg and 400 mg; Pregabalin Capsules 50 mg, 75 mg, 100 mg, and 150 mg; Sevelamer Carbonate Tablets 800 mg; as well as Tadalafil Tablets 5 mg and 20 mg.
The products, manufactured in India, are prescription medications that were labeled and distributed by Dr. Reddy's for institutional use only.
The name and strength of the medication, "For Institutional Use only," "Rx Only," lot number and expiration date are printed on the outside of the package as well as on the individual blister units.
Beginning in 2018, Dr. Reddy's sold the recalled medications to wholesalers, who then distributed these to retail pharmacies. These medications could have been sold to consumers at retail pharmacies in the United States at prices varying based on quantities prescribed, health insurance terms, and other factors.
According to the agency, the packaging of the products is not child resistant and can pose a risk of poisoning if the contents are swallowed by young children.
However, there were no reports of incidents or injuries to date.
Consumers are urged to store the recalled medications in a safe location out of reach of children and contact the firm for a full refund.
In similar incidents citing risk of poisoning to children, Phoenix, Arizona-based Scalpa Inc. in mid-January called back about 10,000 units of Scalpa Numb Maximum Strength Topical Anesthetic Cream. 2021 Global Data Point.
 Load-Date: February 27, 2021

 

End of Document


Sen. Peters Introduces Bill to Grant FDA Needed Authority to Recall Unsafe Drug Products, Protect Consumers
Targeted News Service
August 25, 2020 Tuesday 7:41 AM  EST

 Copyright 2020 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 567 words
Byline: Targeted News Service
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




Sen. Gary Peters, D-Michigan, ranking Democratic member of the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, issued the following news release on Aug. 24:
U.S. Senator Gary Peters, Ranking Member of the Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, today announced he introduced legislation that would grant the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) the authority to recall all unsafe drug products and help protect consumers. Currently, the FDA can only recommend that a company voluntarily recall a drug product, but it cannot require companies to recall these unsafe products. FDA, however, regularly publishes safety alerts relating to over-the-counter medications, prescription drugs, and other regulated drug products like hand sanitizer Recently, the FDA recommended the recall of over 100 hand sanitizer products containing methanol, which can be toxic to humans, but some companies failed to comply.
"Americans deserve to know that the medications and health products they are using are safe - whether it's prescriptions from their local pharmacy, over-the-counter medications, or hand sanitizer," said Senator Peters. "My commonsense bill would help protect Michiganders and people across the country from harmful or dangerous drug products by giving the FDA full authority to require companies to recall any unsafe drug product."
Peters' Safe Drugs Act would ensure that FDA's public safety recalls protect all consumers by requiring companies to pull unsafe drug products from stores and pharmacies. While companies generally agree to recall their products, recent instances where voluntary recalls have not happened highlight the need for this legislation. In situations where companies refuse to comply with FDA's request to recall an unsafe drug product, Americans' health and safety are at risk.
Peters' legislation grows out of findings from a report he issued last year that identified the consumer costs, public health risks, and national security threats posed by the United States' reliance on foreign manufacturing of drugs produced outside of the United States.
Below are statements in support of Senator Peters' legislation:
"Ensuring the safety of patients in Michigan hospitals has long been a key pillar of our work at the MHA. The Safe Drugs Act supports our mission-driven goal to provide only high-quality, safe care and drug products," said Michigan Health & Hospital Association CEO Brian Peters. "The MHA applauds Senator Peters' continued efforts to improve healthcare and, in this legislation, expand the FDA's recall authority to drug products. When there is a harmful product on the market, the FDA must have the ability to swiftly mandate a recall to protect patients in all care settings."
"Giving the FDA the authority to recall drug products is long overdue," said American Society of Health-System Pharmacists (ASHP) CEO Paul W. Abramowitz, Pharm.D., Sc.D. (Hon.), FASHP. "We applaud Senator Peters for taking action on this important reform to help ensure that patients receive safe drugs that improve health outcomes. Hospital and health-system pharmacists have consistently advocated for actions to continually improve drug safety, and for additional tools to help the FDA keep harmful products off the market. ASHP believes that the Safe Drugs Act is an important step in the right direction."
Copyright Targeted News Services
MSTRUCK-7216998 MSTRUCK
 Load-Date: August 25, 2020

 

End of Document


Rwanda recalls Kenya-made antifungal drug over quality concerns
Pharma & Healthcare Monitor Worldwide
January 6, 2024 Saturday

 Copyright 2024 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 322 words
Body




Rwandese Food and Drug Authority has called for the recall of fluconazole tablets manufactured in Kenya on grounds of discolouration.
The Authority said in a statement posted on social media X it has called for the immediate stoppage of distribution of Fluconazole 200 milligram (mg) tablets by Universal Corporation Limited from Kikuyu, Kenya.
Some batches of the drug were said to have changed colour which resulted in the recall.
"Based on the statement number UCL/PD/pp/2023/05/043 of the Universal Corporation Ltd notifying the suspension of certain numbers (batches) of the medicine called Fluconazole 200mg tablets produced by the factory, as a result of the tablets changing colour," said Rwanda FDA in a statement shared in Rwandese (this is the translation).
"Based on the inspection conducted in Rwanda, the FDA confirmed that some numbers of fluconazole 200 mg were suspended from entering the Rwandan market."
The letter highlights that the suspension was voluntary after UCL was notified of the discolouration of the tablets, and an inspection was carried out by RFDA that led to the recall.
The four batches said to discolour were batch numbers; 5810315, 5810316, 5811390 and 5810022.
Fluconazole is used to treat serious fungal or yeast infections.
The FDA urged all drug importers and pharmacies in Rwanda to stop supplying and selling the drug number of the drugs highlighted above and to return them to their place of origin.
UCL is a Kenyan Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Company based in Kikuyu Township, Kiambu County on the outskirts of the capital city Nairobi.
The RFDA said those who import fluconazole are required to submit a report which includes the quantities they have, or sold, those who returned the drugs or those who are holding them in stock within ten days from the December 29 notice date.
The authority did not mention whether the drug has had any effect on the citizenry despite the recall on safety concerns.
 Load-Date: January 6, 2024

 

End of Document


Lupin recalls diabetes treatment drug in US
Business Line
July 8, 2020 Wednesday

 Copyright 2020 Business Line All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 319 words
Dateline: New Delhi, 2020-07-08 12:03:14 
Body




   Drug major Lupin Ltd on Wednesday said it is voluntarily recalling its diabetes treatment drug Metformin Hydrochloride extended-release tablets in the US market.
 In a regulatory filing, the company said that it is voluntarily recalling its Metformin Hydrochloride extended-release tablets USP, 500 mg and 1000 mg products in the US.
 "This recall is being conducted out of an abundance of caution in line with the ongoing interaction with the US Food and Drug Administration on NDMA impurity levels," the filing said.
 Lupin's US subsidiary, Lupin Pharmaceuticals Inc, distributes Metformin Hydrochloride extended-release tablets USP in the strengths of 500 mg and 1000 mg in the US.
 "We believe that the issues identified in the concerned products are addressable and we expect to re-introduce our updated Metformin Hydrochloride extended-release tablet product(s) in the US during the current quarter," the company said.
 Further, "we wish to separately clarify that all of the company's Metformin products manufactured and marketed in India have been tested for NDMA levels and have been assessed to be safe for patients and comply with all relevant regulatory norms," it said.
 The company said the "aforementioned products are part of a completely separate supply chain with respect to their Active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) source, formulation process and manufacturing sites".
 The impurity, N-Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), is classified as a probable human carcinogen based on results from laboratory tests. It is a known environmental contaminant and found in water and foods, including meats, dairy products and vegetables.
 Metformin Hydrochloride extended-release tablets is a prescription oral medication indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve blood glucose control in adults with type-2 diabetes mellitus.
  Shares of Lupin were trading 0.64 per cent higher at ₹876.35 apiece on BSE. 
 Load-Date: July 8, 2020

 

End of Document


Panama recalls ranitidine drugs due to possible carcinogenic potential
CE Noticias Financieras English
August 29, 2022 Monday

 Copyright 2022 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2022 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved
Length: 358 words
Body




Panama City, Aug. 29. The Panamanian Ministry of Health (Minsa) ordered the withdrawal of medicines containing ranitidine in all its pharmaceutical configurations, for having a component that can cause cancer, the health entity said Monday.
Elvia Lau, director of Pharmacy and Drugs of the Ministry of Health (Minsa), said that already in October 2019, oral ranitidine in tablet form was withdrawn throughout the country by revealing in its content nitrosamine impurity, called N-nitrosodimethylamine, which if taken in large quantities can cause cancer.
More recently, Lau indicated, in a resolution of the 11th of this month, the "preventive and immediate suspension of the sanitary registration of all medicines containing the active ingredient ranitidine in all its pharmaceutical forms" at national level was ordered.
"The manufacturers of the product had been told that they had to show, based on evidence and quantitative analysis, whether or not the medicine contained the impurity in considerable quantities, and in view of the fact that they did not demonstrate it, the withdrawal of all its presentations was ordered," it stated.
The resolution orders the distributing agencies, importers and manufacturers to withdraw all the lots of medicines in any of their formulations.
Ranitidine is commonly used for the treatment of peptic ulcer disease (PUD) and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has recommended withdrawing it from the market because it has a potentially carcinogenic compound in high doses, and the drug is being investigated in depth, according to available information.
Lau explained that through the National Directorate of Pharmacy and Drugs of the Minsa, the respective consultations were carried out regarding the availability of therapeutic alternatives to ranitidine, in order to have drugs with a favorable benefit/risk ratio.
He also added that the manufacturers must carry out all the necessary analyses and they must be submitted so that the Pharmacy and Drug Directorate can then authorize its commercialization.
In the meantime, the suspension is maintained. EFE
fa/gf /laa
 Load-Date: August 30, 2022

 

End of Document


Lupin recalls diabetes treatment drug in US
Pharma & Healthcare Monitor Worldwide
July 9, 2020 Thursday

 Copyright 2020 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 321 words
Body




Drug major Lupin Ltd on Wednesday said it is voluntarily recalling its diabetes treatment drug Metformin Hydrochloride extended-release tablets in the US market. In a regulatory filing, the company said that it is voluntarily recalling its Metformin Hydrochloride extended-release tablets USP, 500 mg and 1000 mg products in the US.
"This recall is being conducted out of an abundance of caution in line with the ongoing interaction with the US Food and Drug Administration on NDMA impurity levels," the filing said.
Lupin's US subsidiary, Lupin Pharmaceuticals Inc, distributes Metformin Hydrochloride extended-release tablets USP in the strengths of 500 mg and 1000 mg in the US.
"We believe that the issues identified in the concerned products are addressable and we expect to re-introduce our updated Metformin Hydrochloride extended-release tablet product(s) in the US during the current quarter," the company said.
Further, "we wish to separately clarify that all of the company's Metformin products manufactured and marketed in India have been tested for NDMA levels and have been assessed to be safe for patients and comply with all relevant regulatory norms," it said.
The company said the "aforementioned products are part of a completely separate supply chain with respect to their Active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) source, formulation process and manufacturing sites".
The impurity, N-Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), is classified as a probable human carcinogen based on results from laboratory tests. It is a known environmental contaminant and found in water and foods, including meats, dairy products and vegetables.
Metformin Hydrochloride extended-release tablets is a prescription oral medication indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve blood glucose control in adults with type-2 diabetes mellitus. Shares of Lupin were trading 0.64 per cent higher at Rs 876.35 apiece on BSE. 2020 Global Data Point.
 Load-Date: July 9, 2020

 

End of Document


Peters Introduces Bill to Grant Food and Drug Administration Needed Authority to Recall Unsafe Drug Products, Protect Consumers
Impact News Service
August 25, 2020 Tuesday

 Copyright 2020 Impact Media Limited All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 545 words
Body




Washington: Office of the Senator Gary Peters has issued the following news release:
U.S Senator Gary Peters (MI), Ranking Member of the Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, today announced he introduced legislation that would grant the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) the authority to recall all unsafe drug products and help protect consumers. Currently, the FDA can only recommend that a company voluntarily recall a drug product, but it cannot require companies to recall these unsafe products. FDA, however, regularly publishes safety alerts relating to over-the-counter medications, prescription drugs, and other regulated drug products like hand sanitizer Recently, the FDA recommended the recall of over 100 hand sanitizer products containing methanol, which can be toxic to humans, but some companies failed to comply.
“Americans deserve to know that the medications and health products they are using are safe – whether it’s prescriptions from their local pharmacy, over-the-counter medications, or hand sanitizer,” said Senator Peters. “My commonsense bill would help protect Michiganders and people across the country from harmful or dangerous drug products by giving the FDA full authority to require companies to recall any unsafe drug product.”
Peters’ Safe Drugs Act would ensure that FDA’s public safety recalls protect all consumers by requiring companies to pull unsafe drug products from stores and pharmacies. While companies generally agree to recall their products, recent instances where voluntary recalls have not happened highlight the need for this legislation. In situations where companies refuse to comply with FDA’s request to recall an unsafe drug product, Americans’ health and safety are at risk.
Peters’ legislation grows out of findings from a report he issued last year that identified the consumer costs, public health risks, and national security threats posed by the United States’ reliance on foreign manufacturing of drugs produced outside of the United States.
Below are statements in support of Senator Peters’ legislation:
“Ensuring the safety of patients in Michigan hospitals has long been a key pillar of our work at the MHA. The Safe Drugs Act supports our mission-driven goal to provide only high-quality, safe care and drug products,” said Michigan Health & Hospital Association CEO Brian Peters. “The MHA applauds Senator Peters’ continued efforts to improve healthcare and, in this legislation, expand the FDA’s recall authority to drug products. When there is a harmful product on the market, the FDA must have the ability to swiftly mandate a recall to protect patients in all care settings.”
“Giving the FDA the authority to recall drug products is long overdue,” said American Society of Health-System Pharmacists (ASHP) CEO Paul W. Abramowitz, Pharm.D , Sc.D (Hon.), FASHP. “We applaud Senator Peters for taking action on this important reform to help ensure that patients receive safe drugs that improve health outcomes. Hospital and health-system pharmacists have consistently advocated for actions to continually improve drug safety, and for additional tools to help the FDA keep harmful products off the market. ASHP believes that the Safe Drugs Act is an important step in the right direction.”
 Load-Date: August 26, 2020

 

End of Document


Lupin recalls diabetes treatment drug in US
Dion Global Solutions Limited
July 8, 2020 Wednesday

 Copyright 2020 Dion Global Solutions Limited All Rights Reserved
Length: 357 words
Dateline: India 
Body




India, July 8 -- Drug major Lupin Ltd on Wednesday said it is voluntarily recalling its diabetes treatment drug Metformin Hydrochloride extended-release tablets in the US market.
In a regulatory filing, the company said that it is voluntarily recalling its Metformin Hydrochloride extended-release tablets USP, 500 mg and 1000 mg products in the US.
"This recall is being conducted out of an abundance of caution in line with the ongoing interaction with the US Food and Drug Administration on NDMA impurity levels," the filing said.
Lupin"s US subsidiary, Lupin Pharmaceuticals Inc, distributes Metformin Hydrochloride extended-release tablets USP in the strengths of 500 mg and 1000 mg in the US.
"We believe that the issues identified in the concerned products are addressable and we expect to re-introduce our updated Metformin Hydrochloride extended-release tablet product(s) in the US during the current quarter," the company said.
Further, "we wish to separately clarify that all of the company"s Metformin products manufactured and marketed in India have been tested for NDMA levels and have been assessed to be safe for patients and comply with all relevant regulatory norms," it said.
The company said the "aforementioned products are part of a completely separate supply chain with respect to their Active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) source, formulation process and manufacturing sites".
The impurity, N-Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), is classified as a probable human carcinogen based on results from laboratory tests. It is a known environmental contaminant and found in water and foods, including meats, dairy products and vegetables.
Metformin Hydrochloride extended-release tablets is a prescription oral medication indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve blood glucose control in adults with type-2 diabetes mellitus.
Shares of Lupin were trading 0.64 per cent higher at Rs 876.35 apiece on BSE.
Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Dion Global Solutions Limited. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
 Load-Date: July 8, 2020

 

End of Document


PETERS INTRODUCES BILL TO GRANT FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION NEEDED AUTHORITY TO RECALL UNSAFE DRUG PRODUCTS, PROTECT CONSUMERS
States News Service
August 24, 2020 Monday

 Copyright 2020 States News Service
Length: 552 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




The following information was released by the U.S. Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, Minority Office:
U.S. Senator Gary Peters, Ranking Member of the Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, today announced he introduced legislation that would grant the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) the authority to recall all unsafe drug products and help protect consumers. Currently, the FDA can only recommend that a company voluntarily recall a drug product, but it cannot require companies to recall these unsafe products. FDA, however, regularly publishes safety alerts relating to over-the-counter medications, prescription drugs, and other regulated drug products like hand sanitizer Recently, the FDA recommended the recall of over 100 hand sanitizer products containing methanol, which can be toxic to humans, but some companies failed to comply.
"Americans deserve to know that the medications and health products they are using are safe whether it's prescriptions from their local pharmacy, over-the-counter medications, or hand sanitizer," said Senator Peters. "My commonsense bill would help protect Michiganders and people across the country from harmful or dangerous drug products by giving the FDA full authority to require companies to recall any unsafe drug product."
Peters' Safe Drugs Act would ensure that FDA's public safety recalls protect all consumers by requiring companies to pull unsafe drug products from stores and pharmacies. While companies generally agree to recall their products, recent instances where voluntary recalls have not happened highlight the need for this legislation. In situations where companies refuse to comply with FDA's request to recall an unsafe drug product, Americans' health and safety are at risk.
Peters' legislation grows out of findings from a report he issued last year that identified the consumer costs, public health risks, and national security threats posed by the United States' reliance on foreign manufacturing of drugs produced outside of the United States.
Below are statements in support of Senator Peters' legislation:
"Ensuring the safety of patients in Michigan hospitals has long been a key pillar of our work at the MHA. The Safe Drugs Act supports our mission-driven goal to provide only high-quality, safe care and drug products," said Michigan Health and Hospital Association CEO Brian Peters. "The MHA applauds Senator Peters' continued efforts to improve healthcare and, in this legislation, expand the FDA's recall authority to drug products. When there is a harmful product on the market, the FDA must have the ability to swiftly mandate a recall to protect patients in all care settings."
"Giving the FDA the authority to recall drug products is long overdue," said American Society of Health-System Pharmacists (ASHP) CEO Paul W. Abramowitz, Pharm.D., Sc.D. (Hon.), FASHP . "We applaud Senator Peters for taking action on this important reform to help ensure that patients receive safe drugs that improve health outcomes. Hospital and health-system pharmacists have consistently advocated for actions to continually improve drug safety, and for additional tools to help the FDA keep harmful products off the market. ASHP believes that the Safe Drugs Act is an important step in the right direction."
 Load-Date: August 24, 2020

 

End of Document


Apotex Recalls Diabetes Drug Metformin HCL Extended-Release Tablets
RTT News (United States)
May 29, 2020 Friday

 Copyright 2020 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2020 RTT News All Rights Reserved
Length: 283 words
Byline: editorial@rttnews.com,  (RTT Staff Writer)
Body




       Apotex Corp. recalled all lots of type 2 diabetes medication Metformin hydrochloride in the form of oral film-coated tablets for the potential presence of nitrosamine impurity, N-Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), above levels of the Acceptable Daily Intake Limit (ADI), the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or FDA said in a statement. 

 The Weston, Florida-based generic and biodimilar pharma company is recalling all lots of Metformin Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets, USP 500mg within expiry, packaged in 100 count bottles.

 Apotex agreed to extend the recall to all lots distributed in the U.S. out of an abundance of caution after the FDA notified it that one lot of Metformin HCL it tested showed NDMA levels in excess of the ADI. These were distributed across the U.S. to Warehousing Chains.

 Apotex stopped selling this product in the U.S. in February 2019, and there remains only limited product on the market.

 The company is yet to receive any adverse reports after using the recalled product.

 The product is an oral antihyperglycemic drug used in the management of type 2 diabetes. It is indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve glycemic control in adults and children with type 2 diabetes mellitus, particularly in over weight patients.

 NDMA, a known environmental contaminant, is classified as a probable human carcinogen that could cause cancer. This is generally found in water and foods, including meats, dairy products, and vegetables.

 In September 2019, Apotex had recalled all pack sizes and formats of heartburn medication Ranitidine 75mg and 150mg in the form of tablets for the similar potential presence of NDMA, above levels established by the FDA.        
 Load-Date: May 30, 2020

 

End of Document


Apotex Recalls Diabetes Drug Metformin HCL Extended-Release Tablets
CE Noticias Financieras English
May 29, 2020 Friday

 Copyright 2020 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2020 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved
Length: 283 words
Body




       Apotex Corp. recalled all lots of type 2 diabetes medication Metformin hydrochloride in the form of oral film-coated tablets for the potential presence of nitrosamine impurity, N-Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), above levels of the Acceptable Daily Intake Limit (ADI), the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or FDA said in a statement. 

 The Weston, Florida-based generic and biodimilar pharma company is recalling all lots of Metformin Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets, USP 500mg within expiry, packaged in 100 count bottles.

 Apotex agreed to extend the recall to all lots distributed in the U.S. out of an abundance of caution after the FDA notified it that one lot of Metformin HCL it tested showed NDMA levels in excess of the ADI. These were distributed across the U.S. to Warehousing Chains.

 Apotex stopped selling this product in the U.S. in February 2019, and there remains only limited product on the market.

 The company is yet to receive any adverse reports after using the recalled product.

 The product is an oral antihyperglycemic drug used in the management of type 2 diabetes. It is indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve glycemic control in adults and children with type 2 diabetes mellitus, particularly in over weight patients.

 NDMA, a known environmental contaminant, is classified as a probable human carcinogen that could cause cancer. This is generally found in water and foods, including meats, dairy products, and vegetables.

 In September 2019, Apotex had recalled all pack sizes and formats of heartburn medication Ranitidine 75mg and 150mg in the form of tablets for the similar potential presence of NDMA, above levels established by the FDA.        
 Load-Date: May 30, 2020

 

End of Document


Apotex Recalls Diabetes Drug Metformin HCL Extended-Release Tablets
dpa-AFX International ProFeed
May 29, 2020 Friday 2:48 PM GMT

 Copyright 2020 dpa-AFX Wirtschaftsnachrichten GmbH All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 288 words
Body




       WASHINGTON (dpa-AFX) - Apotex Corp. recalled all lots of type 2 diabetes medication Metformin hydrochloride in the form of oral film-coated tablets for the potential presence of nitrosamine impurity, N-Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), above levels of the Acceptable Daily Intake Limit (ADI), the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or FDA said in a statement.   The Weston, Florida-based generic and biodimilar pharma company is recalling all lots of Metformin Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets, USP 500mg within expiry, packaged in 100 count bottles.  Apotex agreed to extend the recall to all lots distributed in the U.S. out of an abundance of caution after the FDA notified it that one lot of Metformin HCL it tested showed NDMA levels in excess of the ADI. These were distributed across the U.S. to Warehousing Chains.  Apotex stopped selling this product in the U.S. in February 2019, and there remains only limited product on the market.  The company is yet to receive any adverse reports after using the recalled product.  The product is an oral antihyperglycemic drug used in the management of type 2 diabetes. It is indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve glycemic control in adults and children with type 2 diabetes mellitus, particularly in over weight patients.  NDMA, a known environmental contaminant, is classified as a probable human carcinogen that could cause cancer. This is generally found in water and foods, including meats, dairy products, and vegetables.  In September 2019, Apotex had recalled all pack sizes and formats of heartburn medication Ranitidine 75mg and 150mg in the form of tablets for the similar potential presence of NDMA, above levels established by the FDA.      
 Load-Date: May 29, 2020

 

End of Document


Pfizer is forced to recall drug used to treat hypertension after pills were found to be contaminated with cancer-causing compounds
MailOnline
April 25, 2022 Monday 3:11 AM GMT

 Copyright 2022 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved
 
Section: NEWS; Version:1
Length: 427 words
Byline: Paul Farrell For Dailymail.Com
Body




Pharmaceutical giant Pfizer is recalling five batches of its hypertension drug Accupril after it was found to contain chemicals that can cause cancer. 
The recall comes after research found that batches of the drug contained increased levels of a cancer-causing agent, nitrosamine. It was announced on March 22 and involves five batches of pills, each containing 90 bottles.
Pfizer says those bottles may have been split into smaller prescriptions, and has urged any doctor or pharmacist who dealt with the shipments in question to contact them immediately. 
The drugs were distributed in the United States and Puerto Rico between December 2019 and April 2022, a Pfizer news release said. 
In the statement, Pfizer described the recall as 'voluntary.' 
The bottles come with 90 pills and are prescribed in 10mg, 20mg and 40mg increments. The number of pills per bottle can be broken down into smaller amounts. 
In Canada, Pfizer had already announced a similar recall after finding the same impurity to be above acceptable levels. 
A statement from the Canadian government said that people ingesting nitrosamine at the acceptable level or below for 70 years are 'not expected to have an increased risk of cancer.' 
The company said in announcing the recall that they received no reports of specific incidents related to the drug. The giant also stressed that there is no immediate risk to patients already taking the drug. 
Nitrosamines are common in water, foods such as smoked and cured meats as well as dairy products. However, exposure above acceptable levels over long periods of time could increase the risk of cancer.
Accupril works by decreasing the chemicals that narrow blood vessels. This allows blood to flow more smoothly and for the heart to work more efficiently. 
The common side effects of the drug include muscle and joint pain, sensitivity to light, a dry cough and dizziness. 
In 2019, there were 1.3 million active Accupril prescriptions in the United States, according Clinical Calculators.
This is the second recall that Pfizer has faced in six weeks after the company recalled the blood pressure drug Accuretic in early March due to apparent accelerated levels of nitrosamine. 
An FDA statement on the recall instructed patients who are taking this product to consult with their healthcare provider or pharmacy to determine if they have the affected product. 
Patients with the affected product should contact Sedgwick at 888-345-0481 (Mon.-Fri. 8:00 am - 5:00 pm ET) for instructions on how to return their product and obtain reimbursement for their cost. 
 Load-Date: April 25, 2022

 

End of Document


Taiwan FDA orders recall of defective hypertension drug
Pharma & Healthcare Monitor Worldwide
January 5, 2023 Thursday

 Copyright 2023 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 209 words
Body




The Taiwan Food and Drug Administration (FDA) announced Wednesday that it will recall 300,000 Amvlo Film-Coated Tablets 5/160mg that are used to treat high blood pressure after a stability test of the drug yielded low dissolution results, which is likely to affect their efficacy.
The FDA initiated the recall mechanism after receiving information from Everest Pharm. Industrial Co., which manufactures the drug, that three batches of the drug with the designations T0304105, T0304609, and T0304710 were defective, said Hung Kuo-teng (), head of the FDA's Medicinal Products Division.
The low dissolution of the problematic tablets means that they would provide insufficient dosages, which is likely to undermine their efficacy, he said.
The three batches are to be recalled by Everest by Jan. 19, Hung said.
The pharmaceutical company will have to deliver a report on the recall and how similar incidents could be prevented in the future, he said.
The recall is unlikely to result in a shortage of generic medication with the same ingredients and dosage currently available on the market, he said.
People should seek medical help if they have any doubts about the medications they are taking, so that physicians could prescribe appropriate alternatives, he said.
 Load-Date: January 5, 2023

 

End of Document


Sen. Peters Introduces Bill to Grant Food and Drug Administration Needed Authority to Recall Unsafe Drug Products, Protect Consumers
Targeted News Service
August 25, 2020 Tuesday 7:51 AM  EST

 Copyright 2020 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 588 words
Byline: Targeted News Service
Dateline: DETROIT, Michigan 
Body




Sen. Gary Peters, D-Michigan, issued the following news release on Aug. 24:
U.S. Senator Gary Peters (MI), Ranking Member of the Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, today announced he introduced legislation that would grant the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) the authority to recall all unsafe drug products and help protect consumers. Currently, the FDA can only recommend that a company voluntarily recall a drug product, but it cannot require companies to recall these unsafe products. FDA, however, regularly publishes safety alerts relating to over-the-counter medications, prescription drugs, and other regulated drug products like hand sanitizer Recently, the FDA recommended the recall of over 100 hand sanitizer products containing methanol, which can be toxic to humans, but some companies failed to comply.
"Americans deserve to know that the medications and health products they are using are safe - whether it's prescriptions from their local pharmacy, over-the-counter medications, or hand sanitizer," said Senator Peters. "My commonsense bill would help protect Michiganders and people across the country from harmful or dangerous drug products by giving the FDA full authority to require companies to recall any unsafe drug product."
Peters' Safe Drugs Act would ensure that FDA's public safety recalls protect all consumers by requiring companies to pull unsafe drug products from stores and pharmacies. While companies generally agree to recall their products, recent instances where voluntary recalls have not happened highlight the need for this legislation. In situations where companies refuse to comply with FDA's request to recall an unsafe drug product, Americans' health and safety are at risk.
Peters' legislation grows out of findings from a report he issued last year that identified the consumer costs, public health risks, and national security threats posed by the United States' reliance on foreign manufacturing of drugs produced outside of the United States.
Below are statements in support of Senator Peters' legislation:
"Ensuring the safety of patients in Michigan hospitals has long been a key pillar of our work at the MHA. The Safe Drugs Act supports our mission-driven goal to provide only high-quality, safe care and drug products," said Michigan Health & Hospital Association CEO Brian Peters. "The MHA applauds Senator Peters' continued efforts to improve healthcare and, in this legislation, expand the FDA's recall authority to drug products. When there is a harmful product on the market, the FDA must have the ability to swiftly mandate a recall to protect patients in all care settings."
"Giving the FDA the authority to recall drug products is long overdue," said American Society of Health-System Pharmacists (ASHP) CEO Paul W. Abramowitz, Pharm.D., Sc.D. (Hon.), FASHP. "We applaud Senator Peters for taking action on this important reform to help ensure that patients receive safe drugs that improve health outcomes. Hospital and health-system pharmacists have consistently advocated for actions to continually improve drug safety, and for additional tools to help the FDA keep harmful products off the market. ASHP believes that the Safe Drugs Act is an important step in the right direction."
The report can be found here: https://www.hsgac.senate.gov/media/minority-media/peters-unveils-new-report-on-lowering-prescription-drug-costs-with-michigan-patients-and-health-care-providers
[Category: TNSlinxC]
Copyright Targeted News Services
MSTRUCK-7216361 MSTRUCK
 Load-Date: August 25, 2020

 

End of Document


-RPS warns of misleading reports of drug recall
ENP Newswire
March 25, 2022 Friday

 Copyright 2022 Normans Media Limited All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 203 words
Body




Following reports that blood pressure drugs amlodipine and olmesartan have been recalled, RPS has confirmed that this is not the case in the UK.

It was published online in both the Daily Record and Daily Express on the morning of Monday, March 21, that the drugs had been recalled in the US by the Food and Drug Administration due to deviations from standard manufacturing protocols by Macleod Pharmaceuticals.

RPS intervened to ensure the articles were edited to make clear that this is not an issue in the UK after confirmation from the MHRA. Amlodipine tablets from Macleod Pharmaceuticals aren't available for wholesale distribution in the UK, and nor is olmesartan.

An MHRA statement said: 'The MHRA has confirmed that the recall of combined Amlodipine/Olmesartan Medoxomil tablets 10 mg/20 mg, batch number BAD62101A (expiry Feb 24), is for the US market only - while Macleods Pharma does supply other medicines to the UK, this particular product is not available here.'

Patients seeking advice can be reassured that the amlodipine and olmesartan provided by the NHS is not affected by the recall in the USA.

Contact:

T: 0207 572 2737

[Editorial queries for this story should be sent to newswire@enpublishing.co.uk ]   
 Load-Date: March 25, 2022

 

End of Document


Acella Pharma Recalls Thyroid Drugs For Sub Potency
CE Noticias Financieras English
September 18, 2020 Friday

 Copyright 2020 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2020 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved
Length: 303 words
Body




       Acella Pharmaceuticals, LLC recalled certain lots of hypothyroidism medication NP Thyroid in the form of tablets due to super potency, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration said in a statement.

 The company is recalling one lot of 15-mg and one lot of 120-mg of NP Thyroid that are packaged in 100 count bottles in strengths of 15 mg, and 120 mg, with expiration dates between October 2020, and November 2020. The drug is originally intended to treat an underactive thyroid.

 According to the company, the product may have as low as 87 percent of the labeled amount of Liothyronine (T4), it added.

 NP Thyroid is composed of levothyroxine and liothyronine and used to treat hypothyroidism. These lots were distributed across the U.S. to Acella's direct accounts, including wholesalers, pharmacies, and healthcare offices.

 Acella noted that if patients are treated for hypothyroidism with these sub potent NP Thyroid tablets, they may experience signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism, including swelling of the thyroid gland or weight gain, fatigue, increased sensitivity to cold, constipation, dry skin, puffy face, hair loss, slow heart rate and depression.

 Newborn infants or pregnant women who take sub potent NP Thyroid also may experience early miscarriage, fetal hyperthyroidism, and/or impairments to fetal neural and skeletal development.

 Acella said it has received four reports of adverse events until date related to the recalled products.

 "Patients who are currently taking NP Thyroid from the lots being recalled should not discontinue use without contacting their healthcare provider for further guidance and/or a replacement prescription," the company added.

 In May, Acella Pharmaceuticals had recalled 13 lots of hypothyroidism medication NP Thyroid in the form of tablets due to super potency.        
 Load-Date: September 19, 2020

 

End of Document


Acella Pharma Recalls Thyroid Drugs For Sub Potency
RTT News (United States)
September 18, 2020 Friday

 Copyright 2020 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2020 RTT News All Rights Reserved
Length: 303 words
Byline: editorial@rttnews.com,  (RTT Staff Writer)
Body




       Acella Pharmaceuticals, LLC recalled certain lots of hypothyroidism medication NP Thyroid in the form of tablets due to super potency, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration said in a statement.

 The company is recalling one lot of 15-mg and one lot of 120-mg of NP Thyroid that are packaged in 100 count bottles in strengths of 15 mg, and 120 mg, with expiration dates between October 2020, and November 2020. The drug is originally intended to treat an underactive thyroid.

 According to the company, the product may have as low as 87 percent of the labeled amount of Liothyronine (T4), it added.

 NP Thyroid is composed of levothyroxine and liothyronine and used to treat hypothyroidism. These lots were distributed across the U.S. to Acella's direct accounts, including wholesalers, pharmacies, and healthcare offices.

 Acella noted that if patients are treated for hypothyroidism with these sub potent NP Thyroid tablets, they may experience signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism, including swelling of the thyroid gland or weight gain, fatigue, increased sensitivity to cold, constipation, dry skin, puffy face, hair loss, slow heart rate and depression.

 Newborn infants or pregnant women who take sub potent NP Thyroid also may experience early miscarriage, fetal hyperthyroidism, and/or impairments to fetal neural and skeletal development.

 Acella said it has received four reports of adverse events until date related to the recalled products.

 "Patients who are currently taking NP Thyroid from the lots being recalled should not discontinue use without contacting their healthcare provider for further guidance and/or a replacement prescription," the company added.

 In May, Acella Pharmaceuticals had recalled 13 lots of hypothyroidism medication NP Thyroid in the form of tablets due to super potency.        
 Load-Date: September 19, 2020

 

End of Document


Acella Pharma Recalls Thyroid Drugs For Sub Potency
dpa-AFX International ProFeed
September 18, 2020 Friday 2:53 PM GMT

 Copyright 2020 dpa-AFX Wirtschaftsnachrichten GmbH All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 308 words
Body




       WASHINGTON (dpa-AFX) - Acella Pharmaceuticals, LLC recalled certain lots of hypothyroidism medication NP Thyroid in the form of tablets due to super potency, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration said in a statement.  The company is recalling one lot of 15-mg and one lot of 120-mg of NP Thyroid that are packaged in 100 count bottles in strengths of 15 mg, and 120 mg, with expiration dates between October 2020, and November 2020. The drug is originally intended to treat an underactive thyroid.  According to the company, the product may have as low as 87 percent of the labeled amount of Liothyronine (T4), it added.  NP Thyroid is composed of levothyroxine and liothyronine and used to treat hypothyroidism. These lots were distributed across the U.S. to Acella's direct accounts, including wholesalers, pharmacies, and healthcare offices.  Acella noted that if patients are treated for hypothyroidism with these sub potent NP Thyroid tablets, they may experience signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism, including swelling of the thyroid gland or weight gain, fatigue, increased sensitivity to cold, constipation, dry skin, puffy face, hair loss, slow heart rate and depression.  Newborn infants or pregnant women who take sub potent NP Thyroid also may experience early miscarriage, fetal hyperthyroidism, and/or impairments to fetal neural and skeletal development.  Acella said it has received four reports of adverse events until date related to the recalled products.  'Patients who are currently taking NP Thyroid from the lots being recalled should not discontinue use without contacting their healthcare provider for further guidance and/or a replacement prescription,' the company added.  In May, Acella Pharmaceuticals had recalled 13 lots of hypothyroidism medication NP Thyroid in the form of tablets due to super potency.      
 Load-Date: September 18, 2020

 

End of Document


-RPS warns of misleading reports of drug recall
M2 PressWIRE
March 25, 2022 Friday

 Copyright 2022 Normans Media Limited All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 209 words
Body




March 25, 2022

Release date- 24032022 - Following reports that blood pressure drugs amlodipine and olmesartan have been recalled, RPS has confirmed that this is not the case in the UK.

It was published online in both the Daily Record and Daily Express on the morning of Monday, March 21, that the drugs had been recalled in the US by the Food and Drug Administration due to deviations from standard manufacturing protocols by Macleod Pharmaceuticals.

RPS intervened to ensure the articles were edited to make clear that this is not an issue in the UK after confirmation from the MHRA. Amlodipine tablets from Macleod Pharmaceuticals aren't available for wholesale distribution in the UK, and nor is olmesartan.

An MHRA statement said: 'The MHRA has confirmed that the recall of combined Amlodipine/Olmesartan Medoxomil tablets 10 mg/20 mg, batch number BAD62101A (expiry Feb 24), is for the US market only - while Macleods Pharma does supply other medicines to the UK, this particular product is not available here.'

Patients seeking advice can be reassured that the amlodipine and olmesartan provided by the NHS is not affected by the recall in the USA.

Contact:

T: 0207 572 2737

[Editorial queries for this story should be sent to newswire@enpublishing.co.uk ]     
 Load-Date: March 25, 2022

 

End of Document


Acella Pharma Recalls Thyroid Drug For Super Potency
RTT News (United States)
May 26, 2020 Tuesday

 Copyright 2020 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2020 RTT News All Rights Reserved
Length: 290 words
Byline: editorial@rttnews.com,  (RTT Staff Writer)
Body




       The U.S. Food and Drug Administration or FDA announced that Acella Pharmaceuticals, LLC recalled certain lots of hypothyroidism medication NP Thyroid in the form of tablets due to super potency.

 The company is recalling 13 lots of NP Thyroid that are packaged in 100 count bottles in strengths of 30 mg, 60 mg, and 90 mg, with expiration dates between June 20, 2020, and December 20, 2020. The drug is originally intended to treat an underactive thyroid.

 The pharma company said, "The products are being recalled because our testing has found these lots to be super potent." The products may have up to 115 percent of the labeled amount of Liothyronine (T3), it added.

 The company noted that if patients are treated for hypothyroidism with these super potent NP Thyroid tablets, they may experience signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism which include, but are not limited to, weight loss, heat intolerance, fatigue, muscle weakness, hypertension, chest pain, rapid heart rate, or heart rhythm disturbances.

 Further, pregnant women who take super potent NP Thyroid may also experience negative maternal and fetal outcomes including miscarriage and/or impairment to fetal development.

 Acella Pharmaceuticals said it has received two reports of adverse events to date related to the recalled products.

 NP Thyroid is composed of levothyroxine and liothyronine and used to treat hypothyroidism. These lots were distributed across the U.S. to Acella's direct accounts.

 The company said it is arranging for the return of the recalled products, and urged patients who are currently taking the recalled NP Thyroid lots to stop using the product and contact their healthcare provider for further guidance and/or a replacement prescription.        
 Load-Date: May 27, 2020

 

End of Document


Acella Pharma Recalls Thyroid Drug For Super Potency
CE Noticias Financieras English
May 26, 2020 Tuesday

 Copyright 2020 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2020 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved
Length: 290 words
Body




       The U.S. Food and Drug Administration or FDA announced that Acella Pharmaceuticals, LLC recalled certain lots of hypothyroidism medication NP Thyroid in the form of tablets due to super potency.

 The company is recalling 13 lots of NP Thyroid that are packaged in 100 count bottles in strengths of 30 mg, 60 mg, and 90 mg, with expiration dates between June 20, 2020, and December 20, 2020. The drug is originally intended to treat an underactive thyroid.

 The pharma company said, "The products are being recalled because our testing has found these lots to be super potent." The products may have up to 115 percent of the labeled amount of Liothyronine (T3), it added.

 The company noted that if patients are treated for hypothyroidism with these super potent NP Thyroid tablets, they may experience signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism which include, but are not limited to, weight loss, heat intolerance, fatigue, muscle weakness, hypertension, chest pain, rapid heart rate, or heart rhythm disturbances.

 Further, pregnant women who take super potent NP Thyroid may also experience negative maternal and fetal outcomes including miscarriage and/or impairment to fetal development.

 Acella Pharmaceuticals said it has received two reports of adverse events to date related to the recalled products.

 NP Thyroid is composed of levothyroxine and liothyronine and used to treat hypothyroidism. These lots were distributed across the U.S. to Acella's direct accounts.

 The company said it is arranging for the return of the recalled products, and urged patients who are currently taking the recalled NP Thyroid lots to stop using the product and contact their healthcare provider for further guidance and/or a replacement prescription.        
 Load-Date: May 27, 2020

 

End of Document


Innoveix Pharma Recalls All Sterile Compounded Drug Products
CE Noticias Financieras English
July 14, 2021 Wednesday

 Copyright 2021 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2021 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved
Length: 241 words
Body




       Innoveix Pharmaceuticals, Inc. is recalling certain sterile compounded drug products, within expiry, citing a lack of assurance of sterility, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration said.
 The affected products are injectable Semorelin / Ipamorelin 3mg and injectable AOD-9604 3mg. The products can be used for various indications as prescribed.
 Semorelin / Ipamorelin 3mg recall includes Lot# SIP210 with Exp: 12/15/2021; Lot# SIP215 with Exp: 01/14/2022; and Lot# SIP220 with Exp: 01/23/2022.
 Further, AOD-9604 3mg recall includes Lot# AOD205 with Exp: 11/09/2021; Lot# AOD210 with Exp: 11/18/2021; Lot# AOD 215 with Exp: 12/15/2021; and Lot# AOD202 with Exp: 11/09/2021.
 The affected products can be identified by an Innoveix Pharma label. They were distributed in glass vials contained in a small 3 inch by 3 inch white box. Products were distributed across the United States to both customers and/or medical facilities.
 The recall was initiated after concerns arose following a routine inspection of the pharmacy by FDA.
 According to the agency, administration of a drug product intended to be sterile, that is not sterile, could result in serious infections which may be life-threatening.
 However, the company has not received any reports of adverse events related to this recall to date.
 Customers who have received sterile compounded products subject to the recall are urged to return the product to the pharmacy for a full refund.        
 Load-Date: July 15, 2021

 

End of Document


Lupin, Marksans Pharma, Among Others Recall Various Drugs in US Market: FDA Report
Indian Health care news
July 7, 2020 Tuesday

 Copyright 2020 Indian Health care news All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 316 words
Dateline: New Delhi, 2020-07-07 17:58:31 
Body




 July 07 -- Indian drug firms like Lupin, Marksans Pharma, Aurobindo Pharma and Alembic Pharmaceuticals are recalling products in the US market, as per the latest enforcement report by the US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA).
While Lupin and Marksans Pharma are recalling diabetes drug, Aurobindo and Alembic are recalling psychiatric medication in the US market.
 
As per the latest enforcement report, the US based-arm of Lupin is recalling 6,540 bottles of Metformin Hydrochloride extended-release tablets USP, 500 mg, due to CGMP (Current Good Manufacturing Practice) deviations.
The drug has been manufactured at Lupin's Goa-based manufacturing plant.
Similarly, Marksans Pharma is recalling 11,279 bottles of the diabetes drug Metformin Hydrochloride extended-release tablets, which it had supplied to US-based Time-Cap Labs, Inc.
The US health regulator said it detected N-Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) impurity above the acceptable intake level in product of both the companies.
NDMA has been defined as a probable human carcinogen.
Further, Aurobindo Pharma USA Inc, a unit of Hyderabad-based Aurobindo Pharma, is recalling 1,440 bottles of Clozapine tablets in the US market.
The company is recalling the product, which is used to treat certain mood/mental disorders, across the US due to a consumer complaint of 50mg tablets being present in bottles of Clozapine 100mg.
Similarly, Alembic Pharmaceuticals is recalling 19,153 bottles of Aripiprazole tablets in the US for labelling mix up.
The product is used in treatment of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.
All the ongoing voluntary recalls have been classified as class II recalls.
As per USFDA, a class II recall is initiated in a situation in which use of, or exposure to, a violative product may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences or where the probability of serious adverse health consequences is remote.
 Load-Date: July 7, 2020

 

End of Document


Acella Pharma Recalls Thyroid Drugs For Sub Potency
CE Noticias Financieras English
May 3, 2021 Monday

 Copyright 2021 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2021 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved
Length: 360 words
Body




       Acella Pharmaceuticals, LLC recalled certain lots of hypothyroidism medication NP Thyroid in the form of tablets due to sub potency, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration said in a statement.
 The company is recalling 35 commercial lots and three sample lots, including four lots of 15-mg, three lots of 30-mg, 11 lots of 60-mg, seven lots of 90-mg and ten lots of 120-mg of NP Thyroid that are packaged in 100 count bottles, with expiration dates between April 2021 and March 2022.
 The three sample lots included one lot each of 15-mg, 30-mg and 120-mg strength of NP Thyroid that are packaged in 7 count sample bottles, with expiration dates between August 2021 and March 2022.
 NP Thyroid is composed of levothyroxine and liothyronine and used to treat hypothyroidism or an underactive thyroid. According to the company, the product may have less than 90 percent of the labeled amount of Liothyronine (T4) and/or levothyroxine (T4).
 These lots were distributed across the U.S. to Acella's direct accounts, including wholesalers, pharmacies, and healthcare offices.
 Acella noted that if patients are treated for hypothyroidism with these sub potent NP Thyroid tablets, they may experience signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism, including swelling of the thyroid gland or weight gain, fatigue, increased sensitivity to cold, constipation, dry skin, puffy face, hair loss, slow heart rate and depression.
 Newborn infants or pregnant women who take sub potent NP Thyroid also may experience early miscarriage, fetal hyperthyroidism, and/or impairments to fetal neural and skeletal development.
 Acella said it has received 43 reports of serious adverse events until date related to the recalled products.
 "Patients who are currently taking NP Thyroid from the lots being recalled should not discontinue use without contacting their healthcare provider for further guidance and/or a replacement prescription," the company added.
 In September 2020, Acella Pharmaceuticals recalled two lots of NP Thyroid in the form of tablets due to sub potency. Earlier in May 2020, it had also recalled 13 lots of NP Thyroid in the form of tablets due to super potency.        
 Load-Date: May 4, 2021

 

End of Document


Innoveix Pharma Recalls All Sterile Compounded Drug Products
RTT News (United States)
July 14, 2021 Wednesday

 Copyright 2021 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2021 RTT News All Rights Reserved
Length: 241 words
Byline: editorial@rttnews.com,  (RTT Staff Writer)
Body




       Innoveix Pharmaceuticals, Inc. is recalling certain sterile compounded drug products, within expiry, citing a lack of assurance of sterility, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration said.
 The affected products are injectable Semorelin / Ipamorelin 3mg and injectable AOD-9604 3mg. The products can be used for various indications as prescribed.
 Semorelin / Ipamorelin 3mg recall includes Lot# SIP210 with Exp: 12/15/2021; Lot# SIP215 with Exp: 01/14/2022; and Lot# SIP220 with Exp: 01/23/2022.
 Further, AOD-9604 3mg recall includes Lot# AOD205 with Exp: 11/09/2021; Lot# AOD210 with Exp: 11/18/2021; Lot# AOD 215 with Exp: 12/15/2021; and Lot# AOD202 with Exp: 11/09/2021.
 The affected products can be identified by an Innoveix Pharma label. They were distributed in glass vials contained in a small 3 inch by 3 inch white box. Products were distributed across the United States to both customers and/or medical facilities.
 The recall was initiated after concerns arose following a routine inspection of the pharmacy by FDA.
 According to the agency, administration of a drug product intended to be sterile, that is not sterile, could result in serious infections which may be life-threatening.
 However, the company has not received any reports of adverse events related to this recall to date.
 Customers who have received sterile compounded products subject to the recall are urged to return the product to the pharmacy for a full refund.        
 Load-Date: July 15, 2021

 

End of Document


Innoveix Pharma Recalls All Sterile Compounded Drug Products
dpa-AFX International ProFeed
July 14, 2021 Wednesday 9:57 AM GMT

 Copyright 2021 dpa-AFX Wirtschaftsnachrichten GmbH All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 246 words
Body




       WASHINGTON (dpa-AFX) - Innoveix Pharmaceuticals, Inc. is recalling certain sterile compounded drug products, within expiry, citing a lack of assurance of sterility, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration said.  The affected products are injectable Semorelin / Ipamorelin 3mg and injectable AOD-9604 3mg. The products can be used for various indications as prescribed.  Semorelin / Ipamorelin 3mg recall includes Lot# SIP210 with Exp: 12/15/2021; Lot# SIP215 with Exp: 01/14/2022; and Lot# SIP220 with Exp: 01/23/2022.  Further, AOD-9604 3mg recall includes Lot# AOD205 with Exp: 11/09/2021; Lot# AOD210 with Exp: 11/18/2021; Lot# AOD 215 with Exp: 12/15/2021; and Lot# AOD202 with Exp: 11/09/2021.  The affected products can be identified by an Innoveix Pharma label. They were distributed in glass vials contained in a small 3 inch by 3 inch white box. Products were distributed across the United States to both customers and/or medical facilities.  The recall was initiated after concerns arose following a routine inspection of the pharmacy by FDA.  According to the agency, administration of a drug product intended to be sterile, that is not sterile, could result in serious infections which may be life-threatening.  However, the company has not received any reports of adverse events related to this recall to date.  Customers who have received sterile compounded products subject to the recall are urged to return the product to the pharmacy for a full refund.      
 Load-Date: July 14, 2021

 

End of Document


Acella Pharma Recalls Thyroid Drug For Super Potency
dpa-AFX International ProFeed
May 26, 2020 Tuesday 3:28 PM GMT

 Copyright 2020 dpa-AFX Wirtschaftsnachrichten GmbH All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 295 words
Body




       WASHINGTON (dpa-AFX) - The U.S. Food and Drug Administration or FDA announced that Acella Pharmaceuticals, LLC recalled certain lots of hypothyroidism medication NP Thyroid in the form of tablets due to super potency.  The company is recalling 13 lots of NP Thyroid that are packaged in 100 count bottles in strengths of 30 mg, 60 mg, and 90 mg, with expiration dates between June 20, 2020, and December 20, 2020. The drug is originally intended to treat an underactive thyroid.  The pharma company said, 'The products are being recalled because our testing has found these lots to be super potent.' The products may have up to 115 percent of the labeled amount of Liothyronine (T3), it added.  The company noted that if patients are treated for hypothyroidism with these super potent NP Thyroid tablets, they may experience signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism which include, but are not limited to, weight loss, heat intolerance, fatigue, muscle weakness, hypertension, chest pain, rapid heart rate, or heart rhythm disturbances.   Further, pregnant women who take super potent NP Thyroid may also experience negative maternal and fetal outcomes including miscarriage and/or impairment to fetal development.  Acella Pharmaceuticals said it has received two reports of adverse events to date related to the recalled products.  NP Thyroid is composed of levothyroxine and liothyronine and used to treat hypothyroidism. These lots were distributed across the U.S. to Acella's direct accounts.  The company said it is arranging for the return of the recalled products, and urged patients who are currently taking the recalled NP Thyroid lots to stop using the product and contact their healthcare provider for further guidance and/or a replacement prescription.      
 Load-Date: May 26, 2020

 

End of Document


Acella Pharma Recalls Thyroid Drugs For Sub Potency
dpa-AFX International ProFeed
May 3, 2021 Monday 3:52 PM GMT

 Copyright 2021 dpa-AFX Wirtschaftsnachrichten GmbH All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 365 words
Body




       WASHINGTON (dpa-AFX) - Acella Pharmaceuticals, LLC recalled certain lots of hypothyroidism medication NP Thyroid in the form of tablets due to sub potency, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration said in a statement.  The company is recalling 35 commercial lots and three sample lots, including four lots of 15-mg, three lots of 30-mg, 11 lots of 60-mg, seven lots of 90-mg and ten lots of 120-mg of NP Thyroid that are packaged in 100 count bottles, with expiration dates between April 2021 and March 2022.   The three sample lots included one lot each of 15-mg, 30-mg and 120-mg strength of NP Thyroid that are packaged in 7 count sample bottles, with expiration dates between August 2021 and March 2022.  NP Thyroid is composed of levothyroxine and liothyronine and used to treat hypothyroidism or an underactive thyroid. According to the company, the product may have less than 90 percent of the labeled amount of Liothyronine (T4) and/or levothyroxine (T4).  These lots were distributed across the U.S. to Acella's direct accounts, including wholesalers, pharmacies, and healthcare offices.  Acella noted that if patients are treated for hypothyroidism with these sub potent NP Thyroid tablets, they may experience signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism, including swelling of the thyroid gland or weight gain, fatigue, increased sensitivity to cold, constipation, dry skin, puffy face, hair loss, slow heart rate and depression.  Newborn infants or pregnant women who take sub potent NP Thyroid also may experience early miscarriage, fetal hyperthyroidism, and/or impairments to fetal neural and skeletal development.  Acella said it has received 43 reports of serious adverse events until date related to the recalled products.  "Patients who are currently taking NP Thyroid from the lots being recalled should not discontinue use without contacting their healthcare provider for further guidance and/or a replacement prescription," the company added.  In September 2020, Acella Pharmaceuticals recalled two lots of NP Thyroid in the form of tablets due to sub potency. Earlier in May 2020, it had also recalled 13 lots of NP Thyroid in the form of tablets due to super potency.      
 Load-Date: May 3, 2021

 

End of Document


Acella Pharma Recalls Thyroid Drugs For Sub Potency
RTT News (United States)
May 3, 2021 Monday

 Copyright 2021 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2021 RTT News All Rights Reserved
Length: 360 words
Byline: editorial@rttnews.com,  (RTT Staff Writer)
Body




       Acella Pharmaceuticals, LLC recalled certain lots of hypothyroidism medication NP Thyroid in the form of tablets due to sub potency, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration said in a statement.
 The company is recalling 35 commercial lots and three sample lots, including four lots of 15-mg, three lots of 30-mg, 11 lots of 60-mg, seven lots of 90-mg and ten lots of 120-mg of NP Thyroid that are packaged in 100 count bottles, with expiration dates between April 2021 and March 2022.
 The three sample lots included one lot each of 15-mg, 30-mg and 120-mg strength of NP Thyroid that are packaged in 7 count sample bottles, with expiration dates between August 2021 and March 2022.
 NP Thyroid is composed of levothyroxine and liothyronine and used to treat hypothyroidism or an underactive thyroid. According to the company, the product may have less than 90 percent of the labeled amount of Liothyronine (T4) and/or levothyroxine (T4).
 These lots were distributed across the U.S. to Acella's direct accounts, including wholesalers, pharmacies, and healthcare offices.
 Acella noted that if patients are treated for hypothyroidism with these sub potent NP Thyroid tablets, they may experience signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism, including swelling of the thyroid gland or weight gain, fatigue, increased sensitivity to cold, constipation, dry skin, puffy face, hair loss, slow heart rate and depression.
 Newborn infants or pregnant women who take sub potent NP Thyroid also may experience early miscarriage, fetal hyperthyroidism, and/or impairments to fetal neural and skeletal development.
 Acella said it has received 43 reports of serious adverse events until date related to the recalled products.
 "Patients who are currently taking NP Thyroid from the lots being recalled should not discontinue use without contacting their healthcare provider for further guidance and/or a replacement prescription," the company added.
 In September 2020, Acella Pharmaceuticals recalled two lots of NP Thyroid in the form of tablets due to sub potency. Earlier in May 2020, it had also recalled 13 lots of NP Thyroid in the form of tablets due to super potency.        
 Load-Date: May 4, 2021

 

End of Document


Nostrum Labs Expands Recall Of Diabetes Drug Metformin
CE Noticias Financieras English
January 6, 2021 Wednesday

 Copyright 2021 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2021 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved
Length: 456 words
Body




       Nostrum Laboratories, Inc. has extended its recall for type 2 diabetes medication Metformin Hydrochloride Extended-Release (ER), in the form of 750 mg oral film-coated tablets, for the potential presence of nitrosamine impurity, N-Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), above levels of the Acceptable Daily Intake Limit (ADI), the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or FDA said in a statement.

 In early November, Nostrum Labs had recalled 2 lots each of Metformin HCl ER 750 mg tablets and 500 mg tablets. The NDMA levels in these tablets were found to be above the FDA's permissible ADI limit of 96 ng/day.

 Nostrum Labs has now added one more lot of Metformin HCl ER, USP 750 mg tablets (generic equivalent to Glucophage Tablets) in the latest recall for similar NDMA level issue. The lot number is MET200501 with expiry date of July 2022. 

 The Kansas City, Missouri-based company is yet to receive any reports of adverse events related to this recall. 

 The product is an oral antihyperglycemic drug used in the management of type 2 diabetes. It is indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve blood glucose control in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus.

 The affected product is packaged in HDPE bottles of 100 tablets and was distributed across the U.S. to wholesalers. It can be identified as an off-white oblong tablet debossed with "NM7".

 The company has urged pharmacies that have the recalled product to return it to the place of purchase. It also warned consumers to consult a healthcare professional to obtain a replacement or a different treatment option as it could be dangerous for patients with type 2 diabetes to stop taking their Metformin.

 The FDA began testing Metformin in the U.S. supply after it become aware of NDMA in some Metformin products in other countries in late 2019. In May, the agency recommended pharmaceutical companies who are manufacturers of the drug formulation to recall their products.

 Since then, there have been a slew of pharma companies, including Apotex, Amneal, Actavis, Lupin, Nostrum, Granules, Teva, Sun, Bayshore and Marksans, who have announced recall of the product.

 NDMA, a known environmental contaminant, is classified as a probable human carcinogen that could cause cancer. This is generally found in water and foods, including meats, dairy products, and vegetables.

 The elevated NDMA contamination levels also caused several recalls in the U.S. for heartburn medication Ranitidine, sold under the trade name Zantac among others, since September 2019 after the FDA issued an alert.

 The FDA has also been investigating NDMA and other Nitrosamine impurities in blood pressure and heart failure medicines called Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers or ARBs since last year.        
 Load-Date: January 7, 2021

 

End of Document


Pfizer's Hospira recalls 5 injectable drug lots due to report of leak, potential seal issues
FiercePharma Manufacturing
May 23, 2024

 Copyright 2024 Questex Media Group LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: ARTICLE
Length: 325 words
Byline: Zoey Becker
Highlight: The recall, which affects two different types of hydrochloride injections, is attributed to potential sealing issues and one report of a leaking product. 
Body




After a report of leaking product, Pfizer's Hospira unit is pulling five lots of sterile injectable medicines from distribution.
The recall&nbsp;affects certain batches of the company's buprenorphine hydrochloride (HCI) injection and its labetalol hydrocholoride injection, both of which come in Pfizer's Carpuject syringe device.
While the company has not yet received reports of “any relevant” adverse events tied to the recalled batches, it opted to pull the meds due to the potential for incomplete crimp seals.
The concern followed one custumer complaint about a leaking product, Pfizer said in a notice posted by the FDA.
Hospira's buprenorphine product is indicated for intravenous or intramuscular administration to treat pain management that requires an opioid analgesic, while the labetalol HCI product controls blood pressure during severe hypertension.
The recalled batches were distributed to wholesalers and hospitals across the U.S. between September 2023 and April of this year. The buprenorphine HCI lots expire in September and October of this year, while the three lots of labetalol injections carry expiration dates in 2025.&nbsp;
Pfizer is arranging for the return of the affected products and instructed those with remaining inventory to discontinue use, stop distribution and quarantine the injections immediately.
Late last year, contamination&nbsp;concerns led to mutiple recalls for the Pfizer subsidiary.
First, the company yanked&nbsp;one lot of its injectable cancer med bleomycin after a customer flagged glass particulates in one vial. Then, two strengths of injectable sodium bicarbonate and one lot of atropine sulfate injection were pulled due to the “potential presence of glass particulate matter” spotted during routine product inspections.
The spree continued with another market pull of one lot of vancomycin hydrochloride injection vials. That recall was attributed to a report of two visible glass particles in one vial.
 Load-Date: May 28, 2024

 

End of Document


Pfizer recalling popular stop-smoking drug Chantix
FOX - 8 WJW (Cleveland, Ohio)
July 19, 2021 Monday

 Copyright 2021 Local TV LLC
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 339 words
Byline: Nexstar Media Wire
Body




(NEXSTAR) — Pfizer is voluntarily recalling the anti-smoking drug Chantix, a brand of varenicline, due to impurities that exceed approved levels, the Food and Drug Administration has announced.
The recall includes two lots of Chantix 0.5 mg tablets, two lots of Chantix 1 mg tablets, and eight lots of a Chantix kit of 0.5mg/1 mg tablets that may have too much nitrosamine, N-nitroso-varenicline, based on the Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI) level established by Pfizer.
 "N-Nitroso-varenicline belongs to the nitrosamine class of compounds, some of which are classified as probable or possible human carcinogens (substances that could cause cancer), based on laboratory tests such as rodent carcinogenicity studies," the FDA has said.
 The FDA says there is no immediate risk to patients taking this medication, though long-term use "may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans." However, the FDA says the health benefits of quitting smoking outweigh the cancer risk from the impurity in varenicline.
 Chantix helps smokers quit and is intended for short-term use. According to the FDA, cigarette smokers are 15 to 30 times more likely to get lung cancer than non-smokers.
 The FDA said everyone is exposed to some level of nitrosamines, which are common in water and foods, including cured and grilled meats, dairy products and vegetables.
 "These impurities may increase the risk of cancer if people are exposed to them above acceptable levels over long periods of time," the FDA said.
 People taking Chantix should check with their doctor about whether they received an affected lot, and if appropriate, about alternative treatments. Pfizer has received no reports of "adverse events" related to this recall.
 The FDA provided the following table that includes the national drug code (NDC), lot number, expiration date, and configuration details for Chantix tablets. The product lots were distributed across the U.S. and Puerto Rico from June 2019 to June 2021.
 For more information, go to the FDA website.
 Graphic



 
Chantix (Credit: FDA)
 Load-Date: July 21, 2021

 

End of Document


Nostrum Labs Expands Recall Of Diabetes Drug Metformin
dpa-AFX International ProFeed
January 6, 2021 Wednesday 1:36 PM GMT

 Copyright 2021 dpa-AFX Wirtschaftsnachrichten GmbH All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 461 words
Body




       WASHINGTON (dpa-AFX) - Nostrum Laboratories, Inc. has extended its recall for type 2 diabetes medication Metformin Hydrochloride Extended-Release (ER), in the form of 750 mg oral film-coated tablets, for the potential presence of nitrosamine impurity, N-Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), above levels of the Acceptable Daily Intake Limit (ADI), the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or FDA said in a statement.  In early November, Nostrum Labs had recalled 2 lots each of Metformin HCl ER 750 mg tablets and 500 mg tablets. The NDMA levels in these tablets were found to be above the FDA's permissible ADI limit of 96 ng/day.  Nostrum Labs has now added one more lot of Metformin HCl ER, USP 750 mg tablets (generic equivalent to Glucophage Tablets) in the latest recall for similar NDMA level issue. The lot number is MET200501 with expiry date of July 2022.   The Kansas City, Missouri-based company is yet to receive any reports of adverse events related to this recall.   The product is an oral antihyperglycemic drug used in the management of type 2 diabetes. It is indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve blood glucose control in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus.  The affected product is packaged in HDPE bottles of 100 tablets and was distributed across the U.S. to wholesalers. It can be identified as an off-white oblong tablet debossed with "NM7".  The company has urged pharmacies that have the recalled product to return it to the place of purchase. It also warned consumers to consult a healthcare professional to obtain a replacement or a different treatment option as it could be dangerous for patients with type 2 diabetes to stop taking their Metformin.  The FDA began testing Metformin in the U.S. supply after it become aware of NDMA in some Metformin products in other countries in late 2019. In May, the agency recommended pharmaceutical companies who are manufacturers of the drug formulation to recall their products.  Since then, there have been a slew of pharma companies, including Apotex, Amneal, Actavis, Lupin, Nostrum, Granules, Teva, Sun, Bayshore and Marksans, who have announced recall of the product.  NDMA, a known environmental contaminant, is classified as a probable human carcinogen that could cause cancer. This is generally found in water and foods, including meats, dairy products, and vegetables.  The elevated NDMA contamination levels also caused several recalls in the U.S. for heartburn medication Ranitidine, sold under the trade name Zantac among others, since September 2019 after the FDA issued an alert.  The FDA has also been investigating NDMA and other Nitrosamine impurities in blood pressure and heart failure medicines called Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers or ARBs since last year.      
 Load-Date: January 6, 2021

 

End of Document


Nostrum Labs Expands Recall Of Diabetes Drug Metformin
RTT News (United States)
January 6, 2021 Wednesday

 Copyright 2021 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2021 RTT News All Rights Reserved
Length: 456 words
Byline: editorial@rttnews.com,  (RTT Staff Writer)
Body




       Nostrum Laboratories, Inc. has extended its recall for type 2 diabetes medication Metformin Hydrochloride Extended-Release (ER), in the form of 750 mg oral film-coated tablets, for the potential presence of nitrosamine impurity, N-Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), above levels of the Acceptable Daily Intake Limit (ADI), the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or FDA said in a statement.

 In early November, Nostrum Labs had recalled 2 lots each of Metformin HCl ER 750 mg tablets and 500 mg tablets. The NDMA levels in these tablets were found to be above the FDA's permissible ADI limit of 96 ng/day.

 Nostrum Labs has now added one more lot of Metformin HCl ER, USP 750 mg tablets (generic equivalent to Glucophage Tablets) in the latest recall for similar NDMA level issue. The lot number is MET200501 with expiry date of July 2022. 

 The Kansas City, Missouri-based company is yet to receive any reports of adverse events related to this recall. 

 The product is an oral antihyperglycemic drug used in the management of type 2 diabetes. It is indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve blood glucose control in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus.

 The affected product is packaged in HDPE bottles of 100 tablets and was distributed across the U.S. to wholesalers. It can be identified as an off-white oblong tablet debossed with "NM7".

 The company has urged pharmacies that have the recalled product to return it to the place of purchase. It also warned consumers to consult a healthcare professional to obtain a replacement or a different treatment option as it could be dangerous for patients with type 2 diabetes to stop taking their Metformin.

 The FDA began testing Metformin in the U.S. supply after it become aware of NDMA in some Metformin products in other countries in late 2019. In May, the agency recommended pharmaceutical companies who are manufacturers of the drug formulation to recall their products.

 Since then, there have been a slew of pharma companies, including Apotex, Amneal, Actavis, Lupin, Nostrum, Granules, Teva, Sun, Bayshore and Marksans, who have announced recall of the product.

 NDMA, a known environmental contaminant, is classified as a probable human carcinogen that could cause cancer. This is generally found in water and foods, including meats, dairy products, and vegetables.

 The elevated NDMA contamination levels also caused several recalls in the U.S. for heartburn medication Ranitidine, sold under the trade name Zantac among others, since September 2019 after the FDA issued an alert.

 The FDA has also been investigating NDMA and other Nitrosamine impurities in blood pressure and heart failure medicines called Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers or ARBs since last year.        
 Load-Date: January 7, 2021

 

End of Document


Govt notifies new drug-making standards after overseas deaths, gives firms up to a year to implement; The new GMP focuses on quality control measures, allows mechanisms for digitally maintaining records that cannot be tampered with and puts in place a system to recall drugs if necessary.
Indian Express
January 7, 2024 Sunday

 Copyright 2024 Indian Express, distributed by Contify.com All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 580 words
Byline: Anonna Dutt
Body




After a number of overseas deaths allegedly linked to India-made drugs, the Union Health Ministry has notified its Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) that aim to ensure the quality of drugs made in the country, directing pharmaceutical companies to implement them within a year.
The new GMP focuses on quality control measures, allows mechanisms for digitally maintaining records that cannot be tampered with and puts in place a system to recall drugs if necessary.
The notification comes months after the Union Health Minister urged pharmaceutical companies to begin implementing these standards, which are on a par with those set by the World Health Organisation (WHO).
Large companies, which have a turnover of more than Rs 250 crore, will now have to implement the guidelines within the next six months. Small and medium manufacturers, which have a turnover of less than Rs 250 crore, will get a year.
There are nearly 10,500 drug manufacturing units in the country. Of them, 2,000 large companies that export medicines are already WHO-GMP compliant.
But an industry participant, who declined to be named, said: "We had hoped for a two-year window for small companies to comply with the requirements. A lot of infrastructure modifications that are capital intensive will be needed. As for the bigger companies, they are already WHO-GMP compliant."
The draft guidelines were released in 2018. Ensuring compliance with international GMP standards was one of the recommendations made during a Health Ministry brainstorming session early last year following reports of a string of international incidents where Indian syrups and eye drops were allegedly found to be contaminated. The deaths of 70 children in the Gambia, 18 children in Uzbekistan, three people in the United States and six people in Cameroon have been linked to these products.
A risk-based assessment of 254 manufacturing units and 112 public testing labs by the apex drug regulator found poor documentation and a wide range of deficiencies - in process and analytical validations, self-assessment, failure investigation, internal quality review, testing of incoming raw material, infrastructure to avoid cross-contamination, professionally qualified employees and faulty design of manufacturing and testing areas.
The revised GMP guidelines focus on quality control, proper documentation and IT backing to maintain the quality of medicines produced. It also creates a recall mechanism for drug manufacturing companies. "Recall operations shall be capable of being initiated, so as to effectively reach at the level of each distribution channel," said the notification dated December 28. The licensing authority also has to be informed of any intention to recall a product if it is suspected to be defective.
The new guidelines require companies to carry out regular quality reviews of all its products, verify consistency of the quality and the processes, thorough investigation of any deviation or suspected defect and implementation of any preventive actions. It also says that all changes that may affect the production or quality of the product must be validated first.
The guidelines also state that companies should have GMP-related computerised systems, which ensure that there is no tampering of data related to the processes. In addition, the new schedule M also lists out the requirements for additional types of products, including biological products, agents with radioactive ingredients or plant-derived products.
 Load-Date: January 7, 2024

 

End of Document


FDA Recalls Heartburn Drug Zantac Due To Cancer Risk
Newstex Blogs 
Medical Daily
April 8, 2020 Wednesday 9:45 AM EST

 Copyright 2020 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 455 words
Body




Apr 08, 2020( Medical Daily: http://www.medicaldaily.com Delivered by Newstex)  The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has issued a request to manufacturers to stop distributing the heartburn drug ranitidine, widelyknown as Zantac. Researchers discovered that the medication potentially contributes to cancer risk.FDA said in its letter that all prescription and over-the-counter ranitidine drugs must be removed from the market immediately. 
Ranitidine is used to help manage stomach acid and reduce the effects of heartburn, sour stomach and acid indigestion, Popular Science reported Monday[1].However, the drug contains N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA). FDA said some ranitidine products produce high levels of the possible carcinogenic substance when exposed to high temperatures.NDMA occurs due to industrial processes like water treatment. Other commonly consumed products contain low levels of the cancer-linked substance, such as cured meats, dairy and drinking water, according to Harvard epidemiology professor Joshua Gagne.However, he noted that FDA only considers Zantac as potentially cancer linked. The agency needs more evidence of how the heartburn drug directly contributes to the disease.'We make every effort to investigate potential health risks and provide our recommendations to the public based on the best available science,' Janet Woodcock, director of FDA's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, said in a statement[2]. 'We didn't observe unacceptable levels of NDMA in many of the samples that we tested. However, since we don't know how or for how long the product might have been stored, we decided that it should not be available to consumers and patients unless its quality can be assured.'While the agency awaits studies to confirm the cancer-causing effects of ranitidine drugs, people should consider taking alternative medications for their acid problems. Famotidine (Pepcid), cimetidine (Tagamet), esomeprazole (Nexium), lansoprazole (Prevacid) and omeprazole (Prilosec) can be good options for heartburn struggles. It is important to talk to a health care provider before taking a new medication to avoid unwanted effects and to find the best alternative for ranitidine.'Long-term studies are needed to determine whether long-term use of ranitidine is associated with cancer occurrence in humans,' Gagne said. 'Nevertheless, I would not count on ranitidine returning to shelves.' Patients with pre-existing conditions, such as heart disease and diabetes, are more likely to succumb to the disease. Pixabay [ 1]: https://www.popsci.com/story/health/zantac-cancer-recall/ [ 2]:            https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/fda-requests-removal-all-ranitidine-products-zantac-market 
 Load-Date: April 8, 2020

 

End of Document


Pfizer recalls blood pressure drug due to potential carcinogen
Pharma & Healthcare Monitor Worldwide
March 23, 2022 Wednesday

 Copyright 2022 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 249 words
Body




The company has recalled certain lots of Accuretic (quinapril HCl/hydrochlorothiazide), alongside two generics that were distributed by Greenstone: quinapril and hydrochlorothiazide.
Reasons for the recall include that it had a nitrosamine N-nitroso-quinapril presence higher than the Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI) levels, according to the company.
Nitrosamines are compounds that can increase peoples cancer risk if they are exposed to increased levels over a prolonged period of time, the FDA explained. We are actually exposed to these compounds daily, and they can be found in low levels in food, water, and even meat and dairy products. They can also form in drugs during the manufacturing process.
"(B)ut a person taking a drug that contains nitrosamines at-or-below the acceptable daily intake limits every day for 70 years is not expected to have an increased risk of cancer," noted the FDA.
"Pfizer believes the benefit/risk profile of the products remains positive based on currently available data," the company said. "Although long- term ingestion of N-nitroso-quinapril may be associated with a potential increased cancer risk in humans, there is no immediate risk to patients taking this medication."
The company has reiterated that those who are using prescription medications which have potential nitrosamine impurities should not stop taking their medications. They are advised to contact their healthcare provider, to determine if the product they are using is affected by the recall.
 Load-Date: April 22, 2022

 

End of Document


Granules Pharma Recalls Diabetes Drug Metformin HCI Extended-Release Tablets
CE Noticias Financieras English
July 7, 2020 Tuesday

 Copyright 2020 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2020 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved
Length: 442 words
Body




       Granules Pharmaceuticals, Inc. recalled twelve (12) lots of type 2 diabetes medication Metformin hydrochloride Extended-Release, in the form of oral film-coated tablets, for the potential presence of nitrosamine impurity, N-Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), above levels of the Acceptable Daily Intake Limit (ADI), the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or FDA said in a statement.

 Chantilly, Virginia-based Granules Pharma, a R&D; and manufacturing subsidiary of Hyderabad, India-based Granules India Ltd., recalled Metformin HCI ER tablets, USP 750mg within expiry, packaged in 100 and 500 count bottles.

 However, Granules Pharma confirmed that its Metformin HCI ER tablets, USP 500mg and its Metformin Hydrochloride Immediate Release (IR) tablets, USP are not affected by the recall. FDA testing has not shown NDMA in IR Metformin products of any manufacturer.

 Granules agreed to recall all 12 lots distributed in the U.S. market out of an abundance of caution after its test results showed that one lot of Metformin HCL it tested showed NDMA levels in excess of the ADI. These were distributed across the U.S. directly to distributors, and retailers.

 The company is yet to receive any adverse reports after using the recalled product. It has urged anyone with an existing inventory of the product to quarantine the recalled lots immediately, while it is arranging for return of the entire recalled product.

 This recall follows similar recalls issued by five others drug companies for the drug with the same issue over the past one month and more. The companies include Amneal Pharma, Marksans Pharma, Teva Pharma, Apotex and Lupin Pharma.

 The FDA began testing Metformin in the U.S. supply after it become aware of NDMA in some Metformin products in other countries in late 2019.

 The product is an oral antihyperglycemic drug used in the management of type 2 diabetes. It is indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve glycemic control in adults and children with type 2 diabetes mellitus, particularly in over weight patients.

 NDMA, a known environmental contaminant, is classified as a probable human carcinogen that could cause cancer. This is generally found in water and foods, including meats, dairy products, and vegetables.

 The elevated NDMA contamination levels also caused several recalls in the U.S. for heartburn medication Ranitidine, sold under the trade name Zantac among others, since September 2019 after the FDA issued an alert.

 The FDA has also been investigating NDMA and other Nitrosamine impurities in blood pressure and heart failure medicines called Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers or ARBs since last year.        
 Load-Date: July 8, 2020

 

End of Document


Eye drops recalled after US drug-resistant bacteria outbreak
The Associated Press
February 3, 2023 Friday 3:23 PM GMT

 Copyright 2023 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS; LIFESTYLE; DOMESTIC NEWS; STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 405 words
Byline: MIKE STOBBE, AP Medical Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




NEW YORK — U.S. health officials said Thursday a company is recalling its over-the-counter eye drops that have been linked to an outbreak of drug-resistant infections.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention this week sent a health alert to doctors, saying the outbreak included at least 55 people in 12 states. One died and at least five others had permanent vision loss.
The infections, including some found in blood, urine and lungs, were linked to EzriCare Artificial Tears. Many said they had used the product, which is a lubricant used to treat irritation and dryness.
The eye drops are sold under the name EzriCare and is made in India by Global Pharma Healthcare. The Food and Drug Administration said the company recalled unexpired lots of EzriCare Artificial Tears and another product, Delsam Pharma’s Artificial Tears.
The FDA recommended the recall based on manufacturing problems including lack of testing and proper controls on packaging. The agency also blocked import into the United States.
The infections were caused by a bacteria called Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Investigators detected the outbreak strain in open EzriCare bottles.
EzriCare, the company that markets the eye drops in the U.S., said it has stopped distributing the eye drops. It also has a notice on its website urging consumers to stop using the product.
Infections were diagnosed in patients in California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Nevada, Texas, Utah, Washington and Wisconsin. A person in Washington died with a blood infection.
The outbreak is considered particularly worrisome because the bacteria driving it are resistant to standard antibiotics.
Investigators found the bacteria were not susceptible to any antibiotics routinely tested at public health laboratories. However, a newer antibiotic named cefiderocol did seem to work.
How could eye drops cause infections in the blood or lungs? The eye connects to the nasal cavity through the tear ducts. Bacteria can move from the nasal cavity into the lungs. Also, bacteria in these parts of the body can seed infections at other sites such as in the blood or wounds, CDC officials said.
___
Associated Press writer Matthew Perrone contributed to this report.
___
The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Science and Educational Media Group. The AP is solely responsible for all content.
 Load-Date: February 3, 2023

 

End of Document


Eye drops recalled after US drug-resistant bacteria outbreak
Associated Press International
February 2, 2023 Thursday 11:57 PM GMT

 Copyright 2023 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS; LIFESTYLE; DOMESTIC NEWS; STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 422 words
Byline: MIKE STOBBE, AP Medical Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




NEW YORK (AP) — U.S. health officials said Thursday a company is recalling its over-the-counter eye drops that have been linked to an outbreak of drug-resistant infections.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention this week sent a health alert to doctors, saying the outbreak included at least 55 people in 12 states. One died and at least five others had permanent vision loss.
The infections, including some found in blood, urine and lungs, were linked to EzriCare Artificial Tears. Many said they had used the product, which is a lubricant used to treat irritation and dryness.
The eye drops are sold under the name EzriCare and is made in India by Global Pharma Healthcare. The Food and Drug Administration said the company recalled unexpired lots of EzriCare Artificial Tears and another product, Delsam Pharma’s Artificial Tears.
The FDA recommended the recall based on manufacturing problems including lack of testing and proper controls on packaging. The agency also blocked import into the United States.
The infections were caused by a bacteria called Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Investigators detected it in open EzriCare bottles, but further testing was underway.
EzriCare, the company that markets the eye drops in the U.S., said it is not aware of any evidence definitively linking the outbreak to the product, but that it has stopped distributing the eye drops. It also has a notice on its website urging consumers to stop using the product.
Infections were diagnosed in patients in California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Nevada, Texas, Utah, Washington and Wisconsin. A person in Washington died with a blood infection.
The outbreak is considered particularly worrisome because the bacteria driving it are resistant to standard antibiotics.
Investigators found the bacteria were not susceptible to any antibiotics routinely tested at public health laboratories. However, a newer antibiotic named cefiderocol did seem to work.
How could eye drops cause infections in the blood or lungs? The eye connects to the nasal cavity through the tear ducts. Bacteria can move from the nasal cavity into the lungs. Also, bacteria in these parts of the body can seed infections at other sites such as in the blood or wounds, CDC officials said.
___
AP journalist Matthew Perrone contributed to this report.
___
The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Science and Educational Media Group. The AP is solely responsible for all content.
 Load-Date: February 2, 2023

 

End of Document


Eye drops recalled after US drug-resistant bacteria outbreak
Associated Press International
February 3, 2023 Friday 3:23 PM GMT

 Copyright 2023 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS; LIFESTYLE; DOMESTIC NEWS; STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 406 words
Byline: MIKE STOBBE, AP Medical Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




NEW YORK (AP) — U.S. health officials said Thursday a company is recalling its over-the-counter eye drops that have been linked to an outbreak of drug-resistant infections.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention this week sent a health alert to doctors, saying the outbreak included at least 55 people in 12 states. One died and at least five others had permanent vision loss.
The infections, including some found in blood, urine and lungs, were linked to EzriCare Artificial Tears. Many said they had used the product, which is a lubricant used to treat irritation and dryness.
The eye drops are sold under the name EzriCare and is made in India by Global Pharma Healthcare. The Food and Drug Administration said the company recalled unexpired lots of EzriCare Artificial Tears and another product, Delsam Pharma’s Artificial Tears.
The FDA recommended the recall based on manufacturing problems including lack of testing and proper controls on packaging. The agency also blocked import into the United States.
The infections were caused by a bacteria called Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Investigators detected the outbreak strain in open EzriCare bottles.
EzriCare, the company that markets the eye drops in the U.S., said it has stopped distributing the eye drops. It also has a notice on its website urging consumers to stop using the product.
Infections were diagnosed in patients in California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Nevada, Texas, Utah, Washington and Wisconsin. A person in Washington died with a blood infection.
The outbreak is considered particularly worrisome because the bacteria driving it are resistant to standard antibiotics.
Investigators found the bacteria were not susceptible to any antibiotics routinely tested at public health laboratories. However, a newer antibiotic named cefiderocol did seem to work.
How could eye drops cause infections in the blood or lungs? The eye connects to the nasal cavity through the tear ducts. Bacteria can move from the nasal cavity into the lungs. Also, bacteria in these parts of the body can seed infections at other sites such as in the blood or wounds, CDC officials said.
___
Associated Press writer Matthew Perrone contributed to this report.
___
The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Science and Educational Media Group. The AP is solely responsible for all content.
 Load-Date: February 3, 2023

 

End of Document


Eye drops recalled after US drug-resistant bacteria outbreak
American Banking and Market News
February 2, 2023 Thursday

 Copyright 2023 American Banking and Market News All Rights Reserved
Length: 459 words
Body




NEW YORK (AP) â€” U.S. health officials said Thursday a company is recalling its over-the-counter eye drops that have been linked to an outbreak of drug-resistant infections.                
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention this week sent a health alert to doctors, saying the outbreak included at least 55 people in 12 states. One died and at least five others had permanent vision loss.               
The infections, including some found in blood, urine and lungs, were linked to EzriCare Artificial Tears. Many said they had used the product, which is a lubricant used to treat irritation and dryness.                
The eye drops are sold under the name EzriCare and is made in India by Global Pharma Healthcare. The Food and Drug Administration said the company recalled unexpired lots of EzriCare Artificial Tears and another product, Delsam Pharmaâ€™s Artificial Tears.               
The FDA recommended the recall based on manufacturing problems including lack of testing and proper controls on packaging. The agency also blocked import into the United States.                
The infections were caused by a bacteria called Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Investigators detected it in open EzriCare bottles, but further testing was underway.                
EzriCare, the company that markets the eye drops in the U.S., said it is not aware of any evidence definitively linking the outbreak to the product, but that it has stopped distributing the eye drops. It also has a notice on its website urging consumers to stop using the product.                
Infections were diagnosed in patients in California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Nevada, Texas, Utah, Washington and Wisconsin. A person in Washington died with a blood infection.                
The outbreak is considered particularly worrisome because the bacteria driving it are resistant to standard antibiotics.                
Investigators found the bacteria were not susceptible to any antibiotics routinely tested at public health laboratories. However, a newer antibiotic named cefiderocol did seem to work.               
How could eye drops cause infections in the blood or lungs? The eye connects to the nasal cavity through the tear ducts. Bacteria can move from the nasal cavity into the lungs. Also, bacteria in these parts of the body can seed infections at other sites such as in the blood or wounds, CDC officials said.               
___               
AP journalist Matthew Perrone contributed to this report.                
___               
The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Instituteâ€™s Science and Educational Media Group. The AP is solely responsible for all content. 
 Load-Date: February 2, 2023

 

End of Document


Eye drops recalled after US drug-resistant bacteria outbreak
Associated Press State & Local
February 3, 2023 Friday 3:23 PM GMT

 Copyright 2023 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS; LIFESTYLE; DOMESTIC NEWS; STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 406 words
Byline: MIKE STOBBE, AP Medical Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




NEW YORK (AP) — U.S. health officials said Thursday a company is recalling its over-the-counter eye drops that have been linked to an outbreak of drug-resistant infections.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention this week sent a health alert to doctors, saying the outbreak included at least 55 people in 12 states. One died and at least five others had permanent vision loss.
The infections, including some found in blood, urine and lungs, were linked to EzriCare Artificial Tears. Many said they had used the product, which is a lubricant used to treat irritation and dryness.
The eye drops are sold under the name EzriCare and is made in India by Global Pharma Healthcare. The Food and Drug Administration said the company recalled unexpired lots of EzriCare Artificial Tears and another product, Delsam Pharma’s Artificial Tears.
The FDA recommended the recall based on manufacturing problems including lack of testing and proper controls on packaging. The agency also blocked import into the United States.
The infections were caused by a bacteria called Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Investigators detected the outbreak strain in open EzriCare bottles.
EzriCare, the company that markets the eye drops in the U.S., said it has stopped distributing the eye drops. It also has a notice on its website urging consumers to stop using the product.
Infections were diagnosed in patients in California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Nevada, Texas, Utah, Washington and Wisconsin. A person in Washington died with a blood infection.
The outbreak is considered particularly worrisome because the bacteria driving it are resistant to standard antibiotics.
Investigators found the bacteria were not susceptible to any antibiotics routinely tested at public health laboratories. However, a newer antibiotic named cefiderocol did seem to work.
How could eye drops cause infections in the blood or lungs? The eye connects to the nasal cavity through the tear ducts. Bacteria can move from the nasal cavity into the lungs. Also, bacteria in these parts of the body can seed infections at other sites such as in the blood or wounds, CDC officials said.
___
Associated Press writer Matthew Perrone contributed to this report.
___
The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Science and Educational Media Group. The AP is solely responsible for all content.
 Load-Date: February 3, 2023

 

End of Document


Pfizer Recalls Hypertension Drug Accupril After Elevated Levels Of Cancer-Causing Chemicals Found
News Point
April 25, 2022 Monday

 Copyright 2022 NewsPoint TV All Rights Reserved
Length: 273 words
Dateline: New Delhi 
Body




New Delhi, April 25 -- Pharmaceutical giant Pfizer is recalling five batches of its hypertension drug Accupril after it was found to contain elevated levels of chemicals that cause cancer. The drugs were distributed in the United States and Puerto Rico between December 2019 and April 2022, the company said in a release.The announcement about the recall was made on March 22 and contains five batches of pills, each containing 90 bottles.The cancer-causing agent found in the Pfizer drug is nitrosamine. 
Also known as Nnitroso-quinapril, they are common in water and foods, including cured and grilled meats, dairy products and vegetables, according to US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)."Everyone is exposed to some level of nitrosamines. These impurities may increase the risk of cancer if people are exposed to them above acceptable levels over long periods of time," it further said in a release.The Canada unit of Pfizer also recalled all lots of three doses of Accupril last week after finding the same impurity to be above acceptable levels. The pharma company said that no immediate risk to patients taking this medication was found. "Pfizer believes the benefit/risk profile of the products remains positive based on currently available data," it said.Pfizer had last month also recalled some batches of another blood pressure drug Accuretic and two authorised cheaper versions due to the presence of the possible carcinogen.
Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from News Point. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
 Load-Date: April 27, 2022

 

End of Document


Eye drops recalled after US drug-resistant bacteria outbreak
Canadian Press
February 2, 2023 Thursday 07:00 PM EST

 Copyright 2023 The Canadian Press All Rights Reserved
 
Section: LIFESTYLE
Length: 423 words
Byline: Mike Stobbe, The Associated Press
Body




NEW YORK (AP) — U.S. health officials said Thursday a company is recalling its over-the-counter eye drops that have been linked to an outbreak of drug-resistant infections. 
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention this week sent a health alert to doctors, saying the outbreak included at least 55 people in 12 states. One died and at least five others had permanent vision loss.
The infections, including some found in blood, urine and lungs, were linked to EzriCare Artificial Tears. Many said they had used the product, which is a lubricant used to treat irritation and dryness. 
The eye drops are sold under the name EzriCare and is made in India by Global Pharma Healthcare. The Food and Drug Administration said the company recalled unexpired lots of EzriCare Artificial Tears and another product, Delsam Pharma’s Artificial Tears.
The FDA recommended the recall based on manufacturing problems including lack of testing and proper controls on packaging. The agency also blocked import into the United States. 
The infections were caused by a bacteria called Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Investigators detected it in open EzriCare bottles, but further testing was underway. 
EzriCare, the company that markets the eye drops in the U.S., said it is not aware of any evidence definitively linking the outbreak to the product, but that it has stopped distributing the eye drops. It also has a notice on its website urging consumers to stop using the product. 
Infections were diagnosed in patients in California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Nevada, Texas, Utah, Washington and Wisconsin. A person in Washington died with a blood infection. 
The outbreak is considered particularly worrisome because the bacteria driving it are resistant to standard antibiotics. 
Investigators found the bacteria were not susceptible to any antibiotics routinely tested at public health laboratories. However, a newer antibiotic named cefiderocol did seem to work.
How could eye drops cause infections in the blood or lungs? The eye connects to the nasal cavity through the tear ducts. Bacteria can move from the nasal cavity into the lungs. Also, bacteria in these parts of the body can seed infections at other sites such as in the blood or wounds, CDC officials said.
___
AP journalist Matthew Perrone contributed to this report. 
___
The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Science and Educational Media Group. The AP is solely responsible for all content.
 Load-Date: February 3, 2023

 

End of Document


Eye drops recalled after US drug-resistant bacteria outbreak
Associated Press Financial Wire
February 3, 2023 Friday 3:23 PM GMT

 Copyright 2023 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS; LIFESTYLE; DOMESTIC NEWS; STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 406 words
Byline: MIKE STOBBE, AP Medical Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




NEW YORK (AP) — U.S. health officials said Thursday a company is recalling its over-the-counter eye drops that have been linked to an outbreak of drug-resistant infections.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention this week sent a health alert to doctors, saying the outbreak included at least 55 people in 12 states. One died and at least five others had permanent vision loss.
The infections, including some found in blood, urine and lungs, were linked to EzriCare Artificial Tears. Many said they had used the product, which is a lubricant used to treat irritation and dryness.
The eye drops are sold under the name EzriCare and is made in India by Global Pharma Healthcare. The Food and Drug Administration said the company recalled unexpired lots of EzriCare Artificial Tears and another product, Delsam Pharma’s Artificial Tears.
The FDA recommended the recall based on manufacturing problems including lack of testing and proper controls on packaging. The agency also blocked import into the United States.
The infections were caused by a bacteria called Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Investigators detected the outbreak strain in open EzriCare bottles.
EzriCare, the company that markets the eye drops in the U.S., said it has stopped distributing the eye drops. It also has a notice on its website urging consumers to stop using the product.
Infections were diagnosed in patients in California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Nevada, Texas, Utah, Washington and Wisconsin. A person in Washington died with a blood infection.
The outbreak is considered particularly worrisome because the bacteria driving it are resistant to standard antibiotics.
Investigators found the bacteria were not susceptible to any antibiotics routinely tested at public health laboratories. However, a newer antibiotic named cefiderocol did seem to work.
How could eye drops cause infections in the blood or lungs? The eye connects to the nasal cavity through the tear ducts. Bacteria can move from the nasal cavity into the lungs. Also, bacteria in these parts of the body can seed infections at other sites such as in the blood or wounds, CDC officials said.
___
Associated Press writer Matthew Perrone contributed to this report.
___
The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Science and Educational Media Group. The AP is solely responsible for all content.
 Load-Date: February 3, 2023

 

End of Document


Eye drops recalled after US drug-resistant bacteria outbreak
Associated Press State & Local
February 2, 2023 Thursday 11:57 PM GMT

 Copyright 2023 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS; LIFESTYLE; DOMESTIC NEWS; STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 422 words
Byline: MIKE STOBBE, AP Medical Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




NEW YORK (AP) — U.S. health officials said Thursday a company is recalling its over-the-counter eye drops that have been linked to an outbreak of drug-resistant infections.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention this week sent a health alert to doctors, saying the outbreak included at least 55 people in 12 states. One died and at least five others had permanent vision loss.
The infections, including some found in blood, urine and lungs, were linked to EzriCare Artificial Tears. Many said they had used the product, which is a lubricant used to treat irritation and dryness.
The eye drops are sold under the name EzriCare and is made in India by Global Pharma Healthcare. The Food and Drug Administration said the company recalled unexpired lots of EzriCare Artificial Tears and another product, Delsam Pharma’s Artificial Tears.
The FDA recommended the recall based on manufacturing problems including lack of testing and proper controls on packaging. The agency also blocked import into the United States.
The infections were caused by a bacteria called Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Investigators detected it in open EzriCare bottles, but further testing was underway.
EzriCare, the company that markets the eye drops in the U.S., said it is not aware of any evidence definitively linking the outbreak to the product, but that it has stopped distributing the eye drops. It also has a notice on its website urging consumers to stop using the product.
Infections were diagnosed in patients in California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Nevada, Texas, Utah, Washington and Wisconsin. A person in Washington died with a blood infection.
The outbreak is considered particularly worrisome because the bacteria driving it are resistant to standard antibiotics.
Investigators found the bacteria were not susceptible to any antibiotics routinely tested at public health laboratories. However, a newer antibiotic named cefiderocol did seem to work.
How could eye drops cause infections in the blood or lungs? The eye connects to the nasal cavity through the tear ducts. Bacteria can move from the nasal cavity into the lungs. Also, bacteria in these parts of the body can seed infections at other sites such as in the blood or wounds, CDC officials said.
___
AP journalist Matthew Perrone contributed to this report.
___
The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Science and Educational Media Group. The AP is solely responsible for all content.
 Load-Date: February 2, 2023

 

End of Document


Eye drops recalled after US drug-resistant bacteria outbreak
Associated Press Financial Wire
February 2, 2023 Thursday 11:57 PM GMT

 Copyright 2023 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS; LIFESTYLE; DOMESTIC NEWS; STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 422 words
Byline: MIKE STOBBE, AP Medical Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




NEW YORK (AP) — U.S. health officials said Thursday a company is recalling its over-the-counter eye drops that have been linked to an outbreak of drug-resistant infections.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention this week sent a health alert to doctors, saying the outbreak included at least 55 people in 12 states. One died and at least five others had permanent vision loss.
The infections, including some found in blood, urine and lungs, were linked to EzriCare Artificial Tears. Many said they had used the product, which is a lubricant used to treat irritation and dryness.
The eye drops are sold under the name EzriCare and is made in India by Global Pharma Healthcare. The Food and Drug Administration said the company recalled unexpired lots of EzriCare Artificial Tears and another product, Delsam Pharma’s Artificial Tears.
The FDA recommended the recall based on manufacturing problems including lack of testing and proper controls on packaging. The agency also blocked import into the United States.
The infections were caused by a bacteria called Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Investigators detected it in open EzriCare bottles, but further testing was underway.
EzriCare, the company that markets the eye drops in the U.S., said it is not aware of any evidence definitively linking the outbreak to the product, but that it has stopped distributing the eye drops. It also has a notice on its website urging consumers to stop using the product.
Infections were diagnosed in patients in California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Nevada, Texas, Utah, Washington and Wisconsin. A person in Washington died with a blood infection.
The outbreak is considered particularly worrisome because the bacteria driving it are resistant to standard antibiotics.
Investigators found the bacteria were not susceptible to any antibiotics routinely tested at public health laboratories. However, a newer antibiotic named cefiderocol did seem to work.
How could eye drops cause infections in the blood or lungs? The eye connects to the nasal cavity through the tear ducts. Bacteria can move from the nasal cavity into the lungs. Also, bacteria in these parts of the body can seed infections at other sites such as in the blood or wounds, CDC officials said.
___
AP journalist Matthew Perrone contributed to this report.
___
The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Science and Educational Media Group. The AP is solely responsible for all content.
 Load-Date: February 2, 2023

 

End of Document


Eye drops recalled after US drug-resistant bacteria outbreak
The Associated Press
February 2, 2023 Thursday 11:57 PM GMT

 Copyright 2023 Associated Press All Rights Reserved
Section: BUSINESS NEWS; LIFESTYLE; DOMESTIC NEWS; STATE AND REGIONAL
Length: 421 words
Byline: MIKE STOBBE, AP Medical Writer
Dateline: NEW YORK 
Body




NEW YORK — U.S. health officials said Thursday a company is recalling its over-the-counter eye drops that have been linked to an outbreak of drug-resistant infections.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention this week sent a health alert to doctors, saying the outbreak included at least 55 people in 12 states. One died and at least five others had permanent vision loss.
The infections, including some found in blood, urine and lungs, were linked to EzriCare Artificial Tears. Many said they had used the product, which is a lubricant used to treat irritation and dryness.
The eye drops are sold under the name EzriCare and is made in India by Global Pharma Healthcare. The Food and Drug Administration said the company recalled unexpired lots of EzriCare Artificial Tears and another product, Delsam Pharma’s Artificial Tears.
The FDA recommended the recall based on manufacturing problems including lack of testing and proper controls on packaging. The agency also blocked import into the United States.
The infections were caused by a bacteria called Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Investigators detected it in open EzriCare bottles, but further testing was underway.
EzriCare, the company that markets the eye drops in the U.S., said it is not aware of any evidence definitively linking the outbreak to the product, but that it has stopped distributing the eye drops. It also has a notice on its website urging consumers to stop using the product.
Infections were diagnosed in patients in California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Nevada, Texas, Utah, Washington and Wisconsin. A person in Washington died with a blood infection.
The outbreak is considered particularly worrisome because the bacteria driving it are resistant to standard antibiotics.
Investigators found the bacteria were not susceptible to any antibiotics routinely tested at public health laboratories. However, a newer antibiotic named cefiderocol did seem to work.
How could eye drops cause infections in the blood or lungs? The eye connects to the nasal cavity through the tear ducts. Bacteria can move from the nasal cavity into the lungs. Also, bacteria in these parts of the body can seed infections at other sites such as in the blood or wounds, CDC officials said.
___
AP journalist Matthew Perrone contributed to this report.
___
The Associated Press Health and Science Department receives support from the Howard Hughes Medical Institute’s Science and Educational Media Group. The AP is solely responsible for all content.
 Load-Date: February 2, 2023

 

End of Document


Antacid Digene recalled in India after drugs regulator issues alert
India Today Online
September 6, 2023 Wednesday 05:30 PM GMT

 Copyright 2023 India Today All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 280 words
Body




US-based drugmaker Abbott has voluntarily recalled several batches of its popular Digene gel in India after the Drug Controller General of India (DCGI) issued an alert against the popular formulation that is used to relieve acidity and its associated symptoms.  Digene came under scanner after some patients complained of a "bitter taste" and "pungent odor". In a letter dated August 31 the DCGI asked patients to avoid using Digene gel products originating from the company's manufacturing facility in Goa. Furthermore, the drug control panel has directed wholesalers to withdraw all batches of the product that were manufactured at the Goa facility and are still within their active shelf life. 
The DCGI's advisory extends to healthcare professionals as well, with a request to "carefully prescribe and educate their patients to discontinue the use and for reporting of any ADRs (adverse drug reactions) arising due to consumption of the said product".  "...on 9th August 2023, one bottle of Digene Gel Mint flavour used by the customer is of regular taste (sweet) and light pink colour whereas another bottle of same batch observed it was of white colour with bitter taste and pungent odour as per complaint," the letter read. According to the letter, the pharmaceutical company voluntarily recalled batches of all falvours of Digene produced at the Goa facility.  The regulatory authority has instructed relevant officers to keep a watch on the movement, sale, distribution, and stocking of Digene gel. ALSO READ |
WHO issues alert over 'contaminated' Indian-made cough syrup sold in Iraq
ALSO READ |
India suspends another drugmaker's licence over tainted cough syrup
Link to Image
 Graphic



 
Antacid Digene recalled in India after drugs regulator issues alert
 Load-Date: September 6, 2023

 

End of Document


Granules Pharma Recalls Diabetes Drug Metformin HCI Extended-Release Tablets
RTT News (United States)
July 7, 2020 Tuesday

 Copyright 2020 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2020 RTT News All Rights Reserved
Length: 442 words
Byline: editorial@rttnews.com,  (RTT Staff Writer)
Body




       Granules Pharmaceuticals, Inc. recalled twelve (12) lots of type 2 diabetes medication Metformin hydrochloride Extended-Release, in the form of oral film-coated tablets, for the potential presence of nitrosamine impurity, N-Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), above levels of the Acceptable Daily Intake Limit (ADI), the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or FDA said in a statement.

 Chantilly, Virginia-based Granules Pharma, a R&D; and manufacturing subsidiary of Hyderabad, India-based Granules India Ltd., recalled Metformin HCI ER tablets, USP 750mg within expiry, packaged in 100 and 500 count bottles.

 However, Granules Pharma confirmed that its Metformin HCI ER tablets, USP 500mg and its Metformin Hydrochloride Immediate Release (IR) tablets, USP are not affected by the recall. FDA testing has not shown NDMA in IR Metformin products of any manufacturer.

 Granules agreed to recall all 12 lots distributed in the U.S. market out of an abundance of caution after its test results showed that one lot of Metformin HCL it tested showed NDMA levels in excess of the ADI. These were distributed across the U.S. directly to distributors, and retailers.

 The company is yet to receive any adverse reports after using the recalled product. It has urged anyone with an existing inventory of the product to quarantine the recalled lots immediately, while it is arranging for return of the entire recalled product.

 This recall follows similar recalls issued by five others drug companies for the drug with the same issue over the past one month and more. The companies include Amneal Pharma, Marksans Pharma, Teva Pharma, Apotex and Lupin Pharma.

 The FDA began testing Metformin in the U.S. supply after it become aware of NDMA in some Metformin products in other countries in late 2019.

 The product is an oral antihyperglycemic drug used in the management of type 2 diabetes. It is indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve glycemic control in adults and children with type 2 diabetes mellitus, particularly in over weight patients.

 NDMA, a known environmental contaminant, is classified as a probable human carcinogen that could cause cancer. This is generally found in water and foods, including meats, dairy products, and vegetables.

 The elevated NDMA contamination levels also caused several recalls in the U.S. for heartburn medication Ranitidine, sold under the trade name Zantac among others, since September 2019 after the FDA issued an alert.

 The FDA has also been investigating NDMA and other Nitrosamine impurities in blood pressure and heart failure medicines called Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers or ARBs since last year.        
 Load-Date: July 8, 2020

 

End of Document


Pfizer Expands Recall Of Anti-smoking Drug Chantix
dpa-AFX International ProFeed
August 17, 2021 Tuesday 9:27 AM GMT

 Copyright 2021 dpa-AFX Wirtschaftsnachrichten GmbH All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 354 words
Body




       NEW YORK CITY (dpa-AFX) - Drug major Pfizer has expanded its earlier recall of its Chantix (Varenicline) Tablets to include four additional lots, the U.D. Food and Drug Administration said.  Chantix, a treatment to help patients quit smoking, has been recalled due to the presence of a nitrosamine impurity, N-nitroso-varenicline, above the established Acceptable Daily Intake or ADI level.  The recall expansion includes an additional four lots of Chantix 0.5mg/1 mg Tablets to the patient level. The initial recall involved two lots of Chantix 0.5mg Tablets, two lots of Chantix 1 mg Tablets, and eight lots of a Chantix kit of 0.5mg/1 mg Tablets to the patient level.  All affected products lots were distributed nationwide to wholesalers and distributors in the United States and Puerto Rico from June 2019 to June 2021.  According to the agency, long-term ingestion of N-nitroso-varenicline may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans. However, there is no immediate risk to patients taking Chantix, which is intended for short term use.  The FDA stated that the health benefits of stopping smoking outweigh the theoretical potential cancer risk from the nitrosamine impurity in varenicline.  Everyone is exposed to some level of nitrosamines, which are common in water and foods, including cured and grilled meats, dairy products and vegetables. These impurities may increase the risk of cancer if people are exposed to them above acceptable levels over long periods of time.  Pfizer said it believes the benefit/risk profile of CHANTIX remains positive. Patients currently taking Chantix are asked to consult with their doctor to confirm if they received an affected lot, and if appropriate, about alternative treatment options.  Pfizer has not received any reports of adverse events that have been related to this recall to date.  In similar recalls, Viona Pharmaceuticals Inc. in mid June recalled type 2 diabetes drug Metformin in the form of oral film-coated tablets for the potential presence of nitrosamine impurity, N-Nitrosodimethylamine or NDMA, above ADI levels.+      
 Load-Date: August 17, 2021

 

End of Document


Pfizer Expands Recall Of Anti-smoking Drug Chantix
CE Noticias Financieras English
August 17, 2021 Tuesday

 Copyright 2021 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2021 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved
Length: 349 words
Body




       Drug major Pfizer has expanded its earlier recall of its Chantix (Varenicline) Tablets to include four additional lots, the U.D. Food and Drug Administration said.
 Chantix, a treatment to help patients quit smoking, has been recalled due to the presence of a nitrosamine impurity, N-nitroso-varenicline, above the established Acceptable Daily Intake or ADI level.
 The recall expansion includes an additional four lots of Chantix 0.5mg/1 mg Tablets to the patient level. The initial recall involved two lots of Chantix 0.5mg Tablets, two lots of Chantix 1 mg Tablets, and eight lots of a Chantix kit of 0.5mg/1 mg Tablets to the patient level.
 All affected products lots were distributed nationwide to wholesalers and distributors in the United States and Puerto Rico from June 2019 to June 2021.
 According to the agency, long-term ingestion of N-nitroso-varenicline may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans. However, there is no immediate risk to patients taking Chantix, which is intended for short term use.
 The FDA stated that the health benefits of stopping smoking outweigh the theoretical potential cancer risk from the nitrosamine impurity in varenicline.
 Everyone is exposed to some level of nitrosamines, which are common in water and foods, including cured and grilled meats, dairy products and vegetables. These impurities may increase the risk of cancer if people are exposed to them above acceptable levels over long periods of time.
 Pfizer said it believes the benefit/risk profile of CHANTIX remains positive. Patients currently taking Chantix are asked to consult with their doctor to confirm if they received an affected lot, and if appropriate, about alternative treatment options.
 Pfizer has not received any reports of adverse events that have been related to this recall to date.
 In similar recalls, Viona Pharmaceuticals Inc. in mid June recalled type 2 diabetes drug Metformin in the form of oral film-coated tablets for the potential presence of nitrosamine impurity, N-Nitrosodimethylamine or NDMA, above ADI levels.+        
 Load-Date: August 25, 2021

 

End of Document


Pfizer Expands Recall Of Anti-smoking Drug Chantix
RTT News (United States)
August 17, 2021 Tuesday

 Copyright 2021 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2021 RTT News All Rights Reserved
Length: 349 words
Byline: editorial@rttnews.com,  (RTT Staff Writer)
Body




       Drug major Pfizer has expanded its earlier recall of its Chantix (Varenicline) Tablets to include four additional lots, the U.D. Food and Drug Administration said.
 Chantix, a treatment to help patients quit smoking, has been recalled due to the presence of a nitrosamine impurity, N-nitroso-varenicline, above the established Acceptable Daily Intake or ADI level.
 The recall expansion includes an additional four lots of Chantix 0.5mg/1 mg Tablets to the patient level. The initial recall involved two lots of Chantix 0.5mg Tablets, two lots of Chantix 1 mg Tablets, and eight lots of a Chantix kit of 0.5mg/1 mg Tablets to the patient level.
 All affected products lots were distributed nationwide to wholesalers and distributors in the United States and Puerto Rico from June 2019 to June 2021.
 According to the agency, long-term ingestion of N-nitroso-varenicline may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans. However, there is no immediate risk to patients taking Chantix, which is intended for short term use.
 The FDA stated that the health benefits of stopping smoking outweigh the theoretical potential cancer risk from the nitrosamine impurity in varenicline.
 Everyone is exposed to some level of nitrosamines, which are common in water and foods, including cured and grilled meats, dairy products and vegetables. These impurities may increase the risk of cancer if people are exposed to them above acceptable levels over long periods of time.
 Pfizer said it believes the benefit/risk profile of CHANTIX remains positive. Patients currently taking Chantix are asked to consult with their doctor to confirm if they received an affected lot, and if appropriate, about alternative treatment options.
 Pfizer has not received any reports of adverse events that have been related to this recall to date.
 In similar recalls, Viona Pharmaceuticals Inc. in mid June recalled type 2 diabetes drug Metformin in the form of oral film-coated tablets for the potential presence of nitrosamine impurity, N-Nitrosodimethylamine or NDMA, above ADI levels.+        
 Load-Date: August 25, 2021

 

End of Document


Granules Pharma Recalls Diabetes Drug Metformin HCI Extended-Release Tablets
dpa-AFX International ProFeed
July 7, 2020 Tuesday 4:27 PM GMT

 Copyright 2020 dpa-AFX Wirtschaftsnachrichten GmbH All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 447 words
Body




       WASHINGTON (dpa-AFX) - Granules Pharmaceuticals, Inc. recalled twelve (12) lots of type 2 diabetes medication Metformin hydrochloride Extended-Release, in the form of oral film-coated tablets, for the potential presence of nitrosamine impurity, N-Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), above levels of the Acceptable Daily Intake Limit (ADI), the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or FDA said in a statement.  Chantilly, Virginia-based Granules Pharma, a R&D and manufacturing subsidiary of Hyderabad, India-based Granules India Ltd., recalled Metformin HCI ER tablets, USP 750mg within expiry, packaged in 100 and 500 count bottles.  However, Granules Pharma confirmed that its Metformin HCI ER tablets, USP 500mg and its Metformin Hydrochloride Immediate Release (IR) tablets, USP are not affected by the recall. FDA testing has not shown NDMA in IR Metformin products of any manufacturer.  Granules agreed to recall all 12 lots distributed in the U.S. market out of an abundance of caution after its test results showed that one lot of Metformin HCL it tested showed NDMA levels in excess of the ADI. These were distributed across the U.S. directly to distributors, and retailers.  The company is yet to receive any adverse reports after using the recalled product. It has urged anyone with an existing inventory of the product to quarantine the recalled lots immediately, while it is arranging for return of the entire recalled product.  This recall follows similar recalls issued by five others drug companies for the drug with the same issue over the past one month and more. The companies include Amneal Pharma, Marksans Pharma, Teva Pharma, Apotex and Lupin Pharma.  The FDA began testing Metformin in the U.S. supply after it become aware of NDMA in some Metformin products in other countries in late 2019.  The product is an oral antihyperglycemic drug used in the management of type 2 diabetes. It is indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve glycemic control in adults and children with type 2 diabetes mellitus, particularly in over weight patients.  NDMA, a known environmental contaminant, is classified as a probable human carcinogen that could cause cancer. This is generally found in water and foods, including meats, dairy products, and vegetables.  The elevated NDMA contamination levels also caused several recalls in the U.S. for heartburn medication Ranitidine, sold under the trade name Zantac among others, since September 2019 after the FDA issued an alert.  The FDA has also been investigating NDMA and other Nitrosamine impurities in blood pressure and heart failure medicines called Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers or ARBs since last year.      
 Load-Date: July 7, 2020

 

End of Document


Pfizer Expands Recall Of Anti-smoking Drug Chantix
Pharma & Healthcare Monitor Worldwide
August 18, 2021 Wednesday

 Copyright 2021 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 345 words
Body




Drug major Pfizer has expanded its earlier recall of its Chantix (Varenicline) Tablets to include four additional lots, the U.D. Food and Drug Administration said.
Chantix, a treatment to help patients quit smoking, has been recalled due to the presence of a nitrosamine impurity, N-nitroso-varenicline, above the established Acceptable Daily Intake or ADI level.
The recall expansion includes an additional four lots of Chantix 0.5mg/1 mg Tablets to the patient level. The initial recall involved two lots of Chantix 0.5mg Tablets, two lots of Chantix 1 mg Tablets, and eight lots of a Chantix kit of 0.5mg/1 mg Tablets to the patient level.
All affected products lots were distributed nationwide to wholesalers and distributors in the United States and Puerto Rico from June 2019 to June 2021.
According to the agency, long-term ingestion of N-nitroso-varenicline may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans. However, there is no immediate risk to patients taking Chantix, which is intended for short term use.
The FDA stated that the health benefits of stopping smoking outweigh the theoretical potential cancer risk from the nitrosamine impurity in varenicline.
Everyone is exposed to some level of nitrosamines, which are common in water and foods, including cured and grilled meats, dairy products and vegetables. These impurities may increase the risk of cancer if people are exposed to them above acceptable levels over long periods of time.
Pfizer said it believes the benefit/risk profile of CHANTIX remains positive. Patients currently taking Chantix are asked to consult with their doctor to confirm if they received an affected lot, and if appropriate, about alternative treatment options.
Pfizer has not received any reports of adverse events that have been related to this recall to date.
In similar recalls, Viona Pharmaceuticals Inc. in mid June recalled type 2 diabetes drug Metformin in the form of oral film-coated tablets for the potential presence of nitrosamine impurity, N-Nitrosodimethylamine or NDMA, above ADI levels.+
 Load-Date: August 18, 2021

 

End of Document


Amended: Acella Pharma Recalls Thyroid Drug For Super Potency
dpa-AFX International ProFeed
May 27, 2020 Wednesday 5:03 PM GMT

 Copyright 2020 dpa-AFX Wirtschaftsnachrichten GmbH All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 318 words
Body




       WASHINGTON (dpa-AFX) - The U.S. Food and Drug Administration or FDA announced that Acella Pharmaceuticals, LLC recalled certain lots of hypothyroidism medication NP Thyroid in the form of tablets due to super potency.  The company is recalling 13 lots of NP Thyroid that are packaged in 100 count bottles in strengths of 30 mg, 60 mg, and 90 mg, with expiration dates between June 20, 2020, and December 20, 2020. The drug is originally intended to treat an underactive thyroid.  The pharma company said, 'The products are being recalled because our testing has found these lots to be super potent.' The products may have up to 115 percent of the labeled amount of Liothyronine (T3), it added.  The company noted that if patients are treated for hypothyroidism with these super potent NP Thyroid tablets, they may experience signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism which include, but are not limited to, weight loss, heat intolerance, fatigue, muscle weakness, hypertension, chest pain, rapid heart rate, or heart rhythm disturbances.   Further, pregnant women who take super potent NP Thyroid may also experience negative maternal and fetal outcomes including miscarriage and/or impairment to fetal development.  Acella Pharmaceuticals said it has received two reports of adverse events to date related to the recalled products.  NP Thyroid is composed of levothyroxine and liothyronine and used to treat hypothyroidism. These lots were distributed across the U.S. to Acella's direct accounts.  The company said it is arranging for the return of the recalled products. 'Patients who are currently taking NP Thyroid from the lots being recalled should not discontinue use without contacting their healthcare provider for further guidance and/or a replacement prescription,' the company added.  (Corrects and replaces the last paragraph to say patients are urged not to discontinue taking medication)      
 Load-Date: May 27, 2020

 

End of Document


Pfizer recalls blood pressure drugs including Accuretic for cancer risk due to nitrosamine
USA Today Online
March 23, 2022

 Copyright 2022 Gannett Media Corp  All Rights Reserved
Section: PHARMA INDUSTRY NEWS, PHARMA INDUSTRY NEWS, PHARMA INDUSTRY NEWS & CANCER NEWS
Length: 616 words
Byline: Kelly Tyko, USA TODAY
Body




Pfizer is recalling multiple blood pressure medications due to elevated levels of nitrosamine, which can increase the risk of cancer.
The company said it is voluntarily recalling six lots of Accuretic tablets that it distributed, one lot of quinapril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets and four lots of quinapril HCl/ hydrochlorothiazide tablets, because the level of nitrosamine was above the acceptable daily intake.
Nitrosamines are common in water and foods, including cured and grilled meats, dairy products and vegetables, Pfizer said in its recall notice.
"Everyone is exposed to some level of nitrosamines. These impurities may increase the risk of cancer if people are exposed to them above acceptable levels over long periods of time," the company said.
PANCAKE RECALL: Pancake mix recall: Walmart and Kroger brand mixes recalled for possible contamination
RECALL DATABASE:  Check USA TODAY's recall resource for the latest updates
Last September, Pfizer recalled all lots of Chantix smoking cessation drug for high levels of nitrosamine.
Pfizer said it is “not aware of reports of adverse events that have been assessed to be related to this recall.”
“Although long- term ingestion of N-nitroso-quinapril may be associated with a potential increased cancer risk in humans, there is no immediate risk to patients taking this medication,” Pfizer said. 
Health care professionals advise patients to consult with their doctors or pharmacists before discontinuing one of the recalled blood pressure medicines or finding an alternative treatment.
Discontinuing a recalled drug could cause more immediate harm than staying on the medication.
Blood pressure medicine recall
The affected items are 90-count bottles.
Accuretic (quinapril HCl/hydrochlorothiazide) tablets, 10/12.5 mg
 
•	NDC: 0071-3112-23; Lot number: FG5379; Expiration date: August 2024 
•	NDC: 0071-0222-23; Lot number: EA6686; April 2022
Accuretic (quinapril HCl/hydrochlorothiazide) tablets, 20/12.5 mg
 
•	NDC: 0071-5212-23; Lot number: FG5381; Expiration date: August 2024 
•	NDC: 0071-0220-23; Lot number: EA6665; Expiration date: April 2022 
•	NDC: 0071-0220-23; Lot number: CN0640; Expiration date: April 2022
Accuretic (quinapril HCl/hydrochlorothiazide) tablets, 20/25 mg
 
•	NDC: 0071-0223-23; Lot number: ET6974; Expiration date: February 2023
Quinapril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets, 20/25 mg:
 
•	NDC: 59762-5225-9; Lot number: FE3714; Expiration date: February 2023
Quinapril HCl/hydrochlorothiazide tablets, 20/12.5 mg:
 
•	NDC: 59762-0220-1; Lot number: DN6931; Expiration date: March 2023 
•	NDC: 59762-0220-1; Lot number: ED3904; Expiration date: March 2023 
•	NDC: 59762-0220-1; Lot number: ED3905; Expiration date: March 2023
Quinapril HCl/hydrochlorothiazide tablets, 20/25 mg
 
•	NDC: 59762-5225-9; Lot number: FE3714; Expiration date: February 2023
What to do if you take the recalled blood pressure medication
According to Pfizer, patients who are taking one of the affected products should consult with their healthcare provider or pharmacy to determine if they have the affected product.
Patients with the affected product can call 888-843-0247 on weekdays from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. ET for instructions on how to return their product and obtain reimbursement for their cost.
DAILY MONEY NEWSLETTER:  Money tips and advice delivered right to your inbox. Sign up here
AIRBORNE RECALL: Airborne gummies recall: 3.7M bottles recalled after reports of caps popping off, causing injuries
Follow USA TODAY reporter Kelly Tyko on Twitter: @KellyTyko. For shopping news, tips and deals, join us on our Shopping Ninjas Facebook group. 
This article originally appeared on USA TODAY: Pfizer recalls blood pressure drugs including Accuretic for cancer risk due to nitrosamine
 Load-Date: April 12, 2022

 

End of Document


Pfizer recalls high blood pressure drug after chemicals that can cause cancer found
Express Online
April 25, 2022 Monday 11:54 AM GMT

 Copyright 2022 Northern and Shell Media Publications All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 554 words
Byline: Christopher Sharp
Highlight: PFIZER is the company behind one of the vaccines used to combat COVID-19. However, the company doesn't just produce drugs to treat pandemic causing viruses. It also produces drugs to treat a number of conditions. But now, the company has decided to recall one currently used for hypertension.
Body




Drug recalls, just like automotive recalls, are nothing new and not unusual. They happen when a company finds something wrong with one of their products. Subsequently, the company removes from sale that product and aims to fix what's wrong. In the case of Pfizer, it has announced the recall of blood pressure drug Accupril.
 Related articles
The reason why they have recalled the drug is because it has been found to contain chemicals that cause cancer.
While it may seem surprising Pfizer would sell a drug with carcinogenic compounds such as nitrosamine in this case, sometimes companies only discover these problems after the product has gone on sale.
The problem was discovered last month.
The issue affects five batches of pills containing 90 bottles each.
READ MORE: Pancreatic cancer: 'A particularly bad odour' when you go to the loo
Pfizer has urged any doctor or pharmacist who handled the shipments to contact them immediately.
The recall doesn't affect the UK as the drugs were distributed in the United States and Puerto Rico.
Pfizer described their decision to recall the drugs as voluntary, meaning this is not something the company has been ordered to do.
Nitrosamines, although an unfamiliar name to many, are non-cancerous in small doses.
DON'T MISS
Madonna health: Star's 'missing cartilage' ordeal [CELEBRITY HEALTH]
Pfizer fourth booster vaccine: Early trial reveals three side effects [VACCINE]
Cancer: DNA analysis uncovers new clues [CANCER]
 READ MORE
In a statement Pfizer described nitrosamines as "common in water and foods, including cured and grilled meats, dairy products and vegetables".
"Everyone is exposed to some level of nitrosamines. These impurities may increase the risk of cancer if people are exposed to them above acceptable levels over long periods of time".
Furthermore, it was added by Pfizer it had not received any reports of incidents related to the drug and there was no immediate risk to patients.
This is Pfizer's second recall in six weeks, earlier this month they had to recall Accuretic, another blood pressure drug due to high levels of nitrosamine.
 READ MORE
Meanwhile, the drug in question, Accupril, works by decreasing the levels of chemicals that cause blood vessels to narrow.
In common with other drugs Accupril can cause other side effects including: Muscle and joint pain Sensitivity to light A dry cough Dizziness.
The full list of side effects will be listed on the leaflet accompanying each packet of medication.
 Related articles
Alongside concerns of carcinogens in its medications, Pfizer has also received criticism from the World Health Organisation .
In this case their criticism was levelled at Pfizer's pricing of the Covid anti-viral Paxlovid.
The WHO said in statement it: "strongly recommends that Pfizer make its pricing and deals more transparent and that it enlarge the geographical scope of its licence so more generic manufacturers may start to produce the medicine and make it available faster at affordable prices".
Paxlovid was recently approved for patients with mild to moderate symptoms after it was found to reduce hospitalisations by 85 percent.
 Related articles Heart disease: Exercise could reduce your risk and protect the brain Slow down ageing: Mitochondria supplement improved cognition in trials Statins: Side effects of atorvastatin may include nosebleeds
 Load-Date: April 25, 2022

 

End of Document


PharmaLink and Recall Results Announce Strategic Partnership to Enhance Drug Safety and Recall Efficiency
Contify Life Science News
April 26, 2024 Friday 6:30 AM EST

 Copyright 2024 Contify.com All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 909 words
Body




PharmaLink Inc. and Recall Results, Inc. announced a strategic partnership to enhance drug safety and recall efficiency in the pharmaceutical industry. The collaboration aims to streamline the recall process and set new benchmarks in drug safety and recall management. PharmaLink offers comprehensive services for recalled product management, while Recall Results provides sophisticated recall management solutions. The CEOs of both companies express excitement about the partnership and its potential impact on public health.
Key Highlights:
* Recall Results, Inc. is a prominent provider of comprehensive recall management services
* PharmaLink offers services for notification, product retrieval, processing, storage, and disposal of recalled products
Original Press Release:
Largo, Florida, April 26 -- PharmaLink Inc issued the following news release:
PharmaLink Inc., a national leader in pharmaceutical reverse distribution, and Recall Results, a prominent provider of comprehensive recall management and support services, today announced a strategic partnership aimed at enhancing drug safety and recall efficiency in the pharmaceutical industry.

This groundbreaking collaboration leverages PharmaLink Inc.'s expertise in pharmaceutical returns processing and Recall Results' specialized knowledge and advanced technologies for managing complex recalls. Together, they introduce an innovative approach to ensure that the process of drug recalls, withdrawals, and market actions are more efficient, accurate, and responsive to public health needs.

The partnership will focus on developing integrated systems and technologies to streamline the recall process with the full ability to support recalls of any class all the way to the patient level. By combining PharmaLink's vast reverse logistics experience with Recall Results' sophisticated recall tracking capabilities, the two companies aim to significantly reduce the time it takes to identify and respond to potentially harmful pharmaceutical products that may exist in the marketplace.

"Through this partnership, PharmaLink offers comprehensive services for the notification, product retrieval, processing, storage, and disposal of recalled products from the healthcare supply chain. We could not be more excited about the launch of this strategic partnership and the solutions it brings to our clients," said Thierry Beckers, CEO of PharmaLink Inc. "This partnership with Recall Results represents a significant step towards enhancing the safety standards in our industry. Together, we are poised to make a substantial impact in protecting public health."

With a shared commitment to patient safety and compliance, this collaboration promises to deliver unmatched efficiency, accuracy, and responsiveness in addressing drug recalls. Together, PharmaLink and Recall Results are prepared to set new standards for recall management to enhance public health and consumer welfare.

"The collaboration with PharmaLink represents an exciting convergence of knowledge and capabilities," said John McFerron, President & CEO of Recall Results, "By integrating our sophisticated recall management solutions with PharmaLink's pharmaceutical returns expertise, we will realize our shared vision for a safer pharmaceutical environment. We are proud to be part of this initiative that promises to revolutionize drug safety standards."

The PharmaLink-Recall Results partnership is expected to set new benchmarks in drug safety and recall management. Further announcements regarding specific initiatives and programs will be made in the coming months.

About PharmaLink Inc.:
Florida is the nation's premier Pharmaceutical Reverse Distributor. With services spanning the complete spectrum of the pharmaceutical supply chain, we have a 360-degree view of the needs of all businesses involved in the delivery of healthcare. From a reverse logistics perspective, we deliver impactful solutions that trim cycle time while safely removing unwanted products from the marketplace. Our simple user interfaces are backed by a powerful enterprise infrastructure, producing accurate processing and quality analytics that optimize business decisions and increase bottom line. This is all achieved while adhering to stringent regulatory guidelines at the state and federal level. With customizable solutions available for any size client, PharmaLink is the choice provider for pharmaceutical return, recall, and disposal solutions.

About Recall Results, Inc.:
Recall Results, Inc. is an industry-leading provider of innovative recall management solutions, dedicated to ensuring consumer safety and brand preservation. Our advanced recall technologies and expert teams streamline the entire recall process, minimizing disruption and maximizing compliance. From recall communications, notice design and implementation, to product recall call center, data management services and more, Recall Results offers comprehensive recall solutions for its clients. Through strategic expertise, transparency and accountability, we deliver tailored solutions that prioritize consumer welfare while safeguarding brand reputation. Businesses that partner with Recall Results rely on our unwavering commitment to excellence and proven track record of success in recall management across a variety of industries.
[Category: Pharmaceuticals, Pharmaceuticals, Health Care, Partnerships and Alliances, Negative News, Operational Challenges]
Source: PharmaLink Inc.
 Load-Date: May 1, 2024

 

End of Document


Amended: Acella Pharma Recalls Thyroid Drug For Super Potency
RTT News (United States)
May 26, 2020 Tuesday

 Copyright 2020 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2020 RTT News All Rights Reserved
Length: 313 words
Byline: editorial@rttnews.com,  (RTT Staff Writer)
Body




       The U.S. Food and Drug Administration or FDA announced that Acella Pharmaceuticals, LLC recalled certain lots of hypothyroidism medication NP Thyroid in the form of tablets due to super potency.

 The company is recalling 13 lots of NP Thyroid that are packaged in 100 count bottles in strengths of 30 mg, 60 mg, and 90 mg, with expiration dates between June 20, 2020, and December 20, 2020. The drug is originally intended to treat an underactive thyroid.

 The pharma company said, "The products are being recalled because our testing has found these lots to be super potent." The products may have up to 115 percent of the labeled amount of Liothyronine (T3), it added.

 The company noted that if patients are treated for hypothyroidism with these super potent NP Thyroid tablets, they may experience signs and symptoms of hyperthyroidism which include, but are not limited to, weight loss, heat intolerance, fatigue, muscle weakness, hypertension, chest pain, rapid heart rate, or heart rhythm disturbances.

 Further, pregnant women who take super potent NP Thyroid may also experience negative maternal and fetal outcomes including miscarriage and/or impairment to fetal development.

 Acella Pharmaceuticals said it has received two reports of adverse events to date related to the recalled products.

 NP Thyroid is composed of levothyroxine and liothyronine and used to treat hypothyroidism. These lots were distributed across the U.S. to Acella's direct accounts.

 The company said it is arranging for the return of the recalled products. "Patients who are currently taking NP Thyroid from the lots being recalled should not discontinue use without contacting their healthcare provider for further guidance and/or a replacement prescription," the company added.

 (Corrects and replaces the last paragraph to say patients are urged not to discontinue taking medication)        
 Load-Date: May 28, 2020

 

End of Document


US recalled Beximco's drug on diabetes be withdrawn from local market
The New Nation (Bangladesh)
September 13, 2020 Sunday

 Copyright 2020 The New Nation All Rights Reserved
Length: 356 words
Dateline: Dhaka 
Body




Dhaka, Sept. 13 -- TWO lots of diabetes controlling drug of Bangladesh origin were recalled in the US last month for containing a compound that has the potential to cause cancer. The drugs were manufactured by Beximco Pharmaceuticals in Bangladesh, to be marketed in the USA by Bayshore Pharmaceuticals. The US Federal Drug Administration announced that Bayshore is recalling two lots of the drug called Metformin Hydrochloride Extended-Release because the drugs contained a carcinogenic compound called NDMA.
Media reported that the US-FDA tested the medicine and found an excess of the acceptable daily intake limit of the compound. Bayshore has agreed to recall this lot, and out of an abundance of caution, the company has tested samples from eight lots of the tablets manufactured using the same ingredient of the failed lot. Out of eight lots, one lot of 750 mg tablet and one lot of 500 mg have shown NDMA levels above the acceptable limit. Beximco Pharmaceuticals said NDMA came to be in their drug from impurity in the raw material.
Beximco said they have tested the local formations of Metformin Hydrochloride Extended Release, but found no anomalies and so have not recalled any drugs from the domestic market. Five Canadian pharmaceutical companies recalled certain metformin drugs as early as June this year. Meanwhile, in December 2019, the European Medical Association concluded that metformin drugs in the European Union have not been affected with NDMA.
However, while the FDA came down on NDMA and Beximco recalled their products internationally, the Directorate General of Drug Administration is yet to decide on the local market, which contains 427 registered formations of Metformin Hydrochloride. We should test all drugs in the market because metformin is a very popular drug for diabetes control. The Drug Administration must test all the medicine that contains NDMA immediately and take decision accordingly.
Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from The New Nation. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
 Load-Date: October 26, 2022

 

End of Document


Pfizer continues recalls of menopause drug Duavee on faulty packaging concerns 
FiercePharma Manufacturing
June 9, 2020

 Copyright 2020 Questex Media Group LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: ARTICLE
Length: 426 words
Byline: Kyle Blankenship
Highlight: Consumers are on edge as the COVID-19 pandemic casts doubts on the quality of drugs reaching shelves around the world. On U.S. shores, experts say those issues are warranted—and a wave of Pfizer recalls for menopause drug Duavee won't help build confidence.\r
Body




Consumers are on edge as the COVID-19 pandemic casts doubts on the quality of drugs reaching shelves around the world. On U.S. shores, experts say those issues are warranted—and a wave of Pfizer recalls for menopause drug Duavee won't help build confidence.
Pfizervoluntarily recalled two batches ofDuavee––marketed as Duavive abroad––from U.K. shelves after identifying faulty packaging that may have reduced the drug's efficacy, the U.K.'s Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) said Monday.
Pfizer launched the recall after manufacturers identified a flaw in the drug's foil laminate pouch that introduced oxygen and lowered the dissolution rate of active pharmaceutical ingredient bazedoxifene acetate, the MHRA said.
The U.K. recalls comes just weeks after Pfizer voluntarily withdrew 11 lots of Duavee in the U.S. at the wholesaler level and two in Canada in late May, a Pfizer spokeswoman said.
The two recalled U.K. batches of 28-pack Duavive tablets expire inSeptember 2020 and August 2021. Any remaining consumer stock should be quarantined and sent back to Pfizer for reimbursement, according to the MHRA.
RELATED:Are metformin recalls just the start? Valisure CEO calls for independent foreign drug tests amid COVID-19
In a recall notice dated May 20, Health Canada said Pfizer Canada would pull two affected lots of Duavive for issues with bazedoxifene dissolution.
The agency classified the recall as a Class II hazard, meaning "asituation in which the use of, or exposure to, a product may cause temporary adverse health consequences or where the probability of serious adverse health consequences is remote."
Duaveereceived an FDA approval in 2013 as a treatment for symptoms associated with menopause and osteoporosis.
RELATED:FDA pushes metformin recalls for 5 drugmakers after carcinogen contamination
Pfizer's recalls comeas consumers grow increasingly concerned about drug quality during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Last week, independent testing laboratory Valisure's CEO David Light testified to U.S. senators that the pandemic would likely put a strain on the FDA's ability to adequately test the quality of drugs produced in foreign plants.
The FDA has maintained an effective ban on foreign inspections since March, only venturing inspectors into foreign manufacturing facilities for high-priority check-ins.
Meanwhile, the FDA in early June asked five drugmakers to voluntarily withdraw their versions of commonly used diabetes drug metformin off shelves after the agency identified high levels of NDMA contamination in tested lots.
 Load-Date: June 9, 2020

 

End of Document


Drug Recall 2022: High Blood Pressure, Heart Medications Pulled Over Mislabeling Risks
Newstex Blogs 
International Business Times News
September 30, 2022 Friday 11:50 AM EST

 Copyright 2022 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 283 words
Byline: Dawn Geske
Body




Sep 30, 2022( International Business Times News: https://www.ibtimes.com/ Delivered by Newstex)  
 Golden State Medical Supply[1] has recalled both Atenolol and Clopidogrel medications over a mislabeling mishap, which could present health risks. 
According to the recall notice, the drug company received a report that a bottle containing Clopidogrel was mislabeled as Atenolol. The company has issued the recall out of "abundance of caution." 
The recall affects Atenolol 25 mg tablets with a lot number of GS046745 and Clopidogrel 75 mg tablets with a lot number of GS046745. Both have expiration dates of December 2023. 
Atenolol tablets are used to treat hypertension to help lower blood pressure, while Clopidogrel is used to lower the risk of stroke, blood clots, and treats serious heart conditions in people who have experienced a heart attack, chest pain, or circulation problems. 
The Food and Drug Administration warns that people who suddenly stop taking Atenolol have an increased risk of angina, myocardial infarction, hypertensive, and arrhythmic reactions. For patients that take Atenolol and anticoagulant and antiplatelet medications, there is a risk of bleeding if Clopidogrel were taken as part of their drug regimen. 
Distribution of the products was immediately advised to stop. The company said it has not received any reports of adverse reactions related to the recall. 
Consumers who have questions about the recall can contact Golden State Medical Supply at 1-800-284-8633, Ext 116, from 7:30 a.m. to 4 p.m. PT. 
 [ 1]: https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts/golden-state-medical-supply-inc-issues-voluntary-nationwide-recall-atenolol-25-mg-tablets-and 
 Notes



The views expressed in any and all content distributed by Newstex and its re-distributors (collectively, the "Newstex Authoritative Content") are solely those of the respective author(s) and not necessarily the views of Newstex or its re-distributors. Stories from such authors are provided "AS IS," with no warranties, and confer no rights. The material and information provided in Newstex Authoritative Content are for general information only and should not, in any respect, be relied on as professional advice. Newstex Authoritative Content is not "read and approved" before it is posted. Accordingly, neither Newstex nor its re-distributors make any claims, promises or guarantees about the accuracy, completeness, or adequacy of the information contained therein or linked to from such content, nor do they take responsibility for any aspect of such content. The Newstex Authoritative Content shall be construed as author-based content and commentary. Accordingly, no warranties or other guarantees are offered as to the quality of the opinions, commentary or anything else appearing in such Newstex Authoritative Content. Newstex and its re-distributors expressly reserve the right to delete stories at its and their sole discretion.
 Load-Date: September 30, 2022

 

End of Document


Pfizer Recalls Blood Pressure Drug Over 'Impurity' Concerns
Newstex Blogs 
International Business Times Australia
March 22, 2022 Tuesday 6:08 AM EST

 Copyright 2022 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 734 words
Body




Mar 22, 2022( International Business Times Australia: http://www.ibtimes.com.au/ Delivered by Newstex)  
 Pfizer is voluntarily recalling certain hypertension medications because of the possible presence of impurities. The affected products were distributed across the U.S. and also in Puerto Rico. 
Pfizerannounced[1]Monday that it recalled certain lots of Accuretic (quinapril HCl/hydrochlorothiazide), as well as two generics that were distributed by Greenstone: quinapril and hydrochlorothiazide and quinapril HCl/ hydrochlorothiazide. 
The recall was initiated due to the presence of the nitrosamine N-nitroso-quinapril that are above the Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI) levels, the company said. This comes just weeks after Pfizer recalled[2]Accuretic in Canada because of nitrosamine impurity. 
Nitrosamines are compounds that people are actually exposed to everyday. They can be found in low levels in food, water and even meat and dairy products. However, they can also form in drugs during the manufacturing process. Nitrosamine impurities can increase people's cancer risk if they are exposed to it "above acceptable levels"over a long period of time, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) explained[3]. 
"(B)ut a person taking a drug that contains nitrosamines at-or-below the acceptable daily intake limits every day for 70 years is not expected to have an increased risk of cancer,"noted[4]the FDA. 
Pfizer has not received any reports of adverse events related to the issue so far. 
"Pfizer believes the benefit/risk profile of the products remains positive based on currently available data,"the company said. "Although long- term ingestion of N-nitroso-quinapril may be associated with a potential increased cancer risk in humans, there is no immediate risk to patients taking this medication." 
The affected products were distributedfrom November 2019 to March 2022. The specifications of the recalled items, including the lot numbers, national drug code, expiration dates and configuration details, as well as photos of the packaging, are available on Pfizer's website. 
According to the agency, those who are using prescription medications that have potential nitrosamine impurities "should not stop taking their medications."They should contact their healthcare provider to determine if the product they're using is affected by therecall[5]. 
"Pfizer places the utmost emphasis on patient safety and product quality at every step in the manufacturing and supply chain process,"the company added. 

Photo: AFP / Don EMMERT 
 [ 1]: https://www.pfizer.com/news/press-release/press-release-detail/pfizer-voluntary-nationwide-recall-lots-accuretictm [ 2]: https://recalls-rappels.canada.ca/en/alert-recall/pfizer-recalls-accuretic-blood-pressure-tablets-due-nitrosamine-impurity [ 3]: https://www.fda.gov/consumers/consumer-updates/what-know-and-do-about-possible-nitrosamines-your-medication [ 4]: https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/information-about-nitrosamine-impurities-medications [ 5]: https://www.ibtimes.com/jergens-lotion-recall-moisturizer-pulled-over-bacteria-contamination-risk-3444830?msclkid=1cfac34fa98e11ec9d3c6702fbd7cdb8 
The views expressed in any and all content distributed by Newstex and its re-distributors (collectively, the "Newstex Authoritative Content") are solely those of the respective author(s) and not necessarily the views of Newstex or its re-distributors. Stories from such authors are provided "AS IS," with no warranties, and confer no rights. The material and information provided in Newstex Authoritative Content are for general information only and should not, in any respect, be relied on as professional advice. Newstex Authoritative Content is not "read and approved" before it is posted. Accordingly, neither Newstex nor its re-distributors make any claims, promises or guarantees about the accuracy, completeness, or adequacy of the information contained therein or linked to from such content, nor do they take responsibility for any aspect of such content. The Newstex Authoritative Content shall be construed as author-based content and commentary. Accordingly, no warranties or other guarantees are offered as to the quality of the opinions, commentary or anything else appearing in such Newstex Authoritative Content. Newstex and its re-distributors expressly reserve the right to delete stories at its and their sole discretion.
 Load-Date: March 22, 2022

 

End of Document


DeLauro Celebrates FDA Mandatory Drug Recall Authority in the America COMPETES Act; Rep. Rosa L. DeLauro (D-CT) News Release
Congressional Documents and Publications
February 4, 2022

 Copyright 2022 Federal Information and News Dispatch, Inc.
Section: U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES DOCUMENTS
Length: 559 words
Body




WASHINGTON, D.C. -- House Appropriations Committee Chair Rosa DeLauro (D-CT-03) today celebrated the inclusion of a provision in the America COMPETES Act to give the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) mandatory recall authority over drug products.
"For years, I have fought to advance legislation - the Recall Unsafe Drugs Act - giving the FDA mandatory recall authority over drugs so the Agency can fully use its regulatory authority to protect public health," said Congresswoman DeLauro. "I am pleased the America COMPETES Act includes this expanded authority; authority the Agency already has over foods, medical devices, and biological products. FDA's lack of mandatory drug recall authority has real-world consequences. Even if dangerous products that pose serious risks to consumers are discovered, the Agency can only request a recall. Companies can - and do - refuse voluntary recalls. That is unconscionable and puts people at risk. That is why I am committed to ensuring FDA receives this expanded authority and has the resources to mandate recalls of unsafe drugs."
"At Valisure, we applaud Congresswoman Rosa DeLauro for tirelessly advocating for the FDA to acquire mandatory recall authority over drugs and, ultimately, add this matter to the COMPETES Act," said Chief Executive Officer of Valisure David Light. "We strongly support efforts that can improve the quality of the U.S. drug supply, which is heavily reliant on a complex, global, and increasingly vulnerable supply chain. We hope the FDA will utilize its new authority in conjunction with the proven impact of independent testing, which has identified multiple adulterated products and industry-wide quality concerns. The combination of increased vigilance and independent quality assurance throughout the supply chain with enhanced regulatory authority has the potential to significantly diminish the unnecessary risk to consumers from contaminated or otherwise adulterated products. We encourage the FDA and Congress to continue taking actions in support of improving drug quality and the robustness of the global supply chain."
DeLauro first introduced legislation to give FDA mandatory recall authority over drugs in 2017 following the death of 10 children associated with Hyland's teething tablets. Overall, the teething tablets were linked to more than 400 adverse event reports in children including death, seizures, shortness of breath, and tremors. Despite the FDA issuing several safety warnings on the dangers of homeopathic teething products, the manufacturer refused to recall its products. That refusal left deadly products in the homes of unsuspecting parents who were still, unknowingly, giving it to their children.
Recently, DeLauro secured similar language to give FDA mandatory recall authority over drugs in the Fiscal Year 2021 Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies spending bill. That summer, a foreign manufacturer of hand sanitizers refused a voluntary recall request after the FDA discovered they were potentially contaminated with methanol, a toxic, life-threatening substance that can be absorbed through the skin or accidentally ingested by children.
Read this original document at: https://delauro.house.gov/media-center/press-releases/delauro-celebrates-fda-mandatory-drug-recall-authority-america-competes
 Load-Date: February 5, 2022

 

End of Document


Pfizer Recalls Blood Pressure Drug Over 'Impurity' Concerns
Newstex Blogs 
International Business Times News
March 22, 2022 Tuesday 6:45 AM EST

 Copyright 2022 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 780 words
Body




Mar 22, 2022( International Business Times News: http://www.ibtimes.com Delivered by Newstex)  
 KEY POINTSPfizer isrecalling Accuretic blood pressure medication because of nitrosamine impurityNitrosamines may increase cancer risk if people are exposed "above acceptable levels"Those using the medications should talk to their health care provider Pfizer is voluntarily recalling certain hypertension medications because of the possible presence of impurities. The affected products were distributed across the U.S. and also in Puerto Rico. 
Pfizerannounced[1]Monday that it recalled certain lots of Accuretic (quinapril HCl/hydrochlorothiazide), as well as two generics that were distributed by Greenstone: quinapril and hydrochlorothiazide and quinapril HCl/ hydrochlorothiazide. 
The recall was initiated due to the presence of the nitrosamine N-nitroso-quinapril that are above the Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI) levels, the company said. This comes just weeks after Pfizer recalled[2]Accuretic in Canada because of nitrosamine impurity. 
Nitrosamines are compounds that people are actually exposed to everyday. They can be found in low levels in food, water and even meat and dairy products. However, they can also form in drugs during the manufacturing process. Nitrosamine impurities can increase people's cancer risk if they are exposed to it "above acceptable levels"over a long period of time, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) explained[3]. 
"(B)ut a person taking a drug that contains nitrosamines at-or-below the acceptable daily intake limits every day for 70 years is not expected to have an increased risk of cancer,"noted[4]the FDA. 
Pfizer has not received any reports of adverse events related to the issue so far. 
"Pfizer believes the benefit/risk profile of the products remains positive based on currently available data,"the company said. "Although long- term ingestion of N-nitroso-quinapril may be associated with a potential increased cancer risk in humans, there is no immediate risk to patients taking this medication." 
The affected products were distributedfrom November 2019 to March 2022. The specifications of the recalled items, including the lot numbers, national drug code, expiration dates and configuration details, as well as photos of the packaging, are available on Pfizer's website. 
According to the agency, those who are using prescription medications that have potential nitrosamine impurities "should not stop taking their medications."They should contact their healthcare provider to determine if the product they're using is affected by therecall[5]. 
"Pfizer places the utmost emphasis on patient safety and product quality at every step in the manufacturing and supply chain process,"the company added. 
 The Pfizer logo is pictured here. Photo: AFP / Don EMMERT 
 [ 1]: https://www.pfizer.com/news/press-release/press-release-detail/pfizer-voluntary-nationwide-recall-lots-accuretictm [ 2]: https://recalls-rappels.canada.ca/en/alert-recall/pfizer-recalls-accuretic-blood-pressure-tablets-due-nitrosamine-impurity [ 3]: https://www.fda.gov/consumers/consumer-updates/what-know-and-do-about-possible-nitrosamines-your-medication [ 4]: https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/information-about-nitrosamine-impurities-medications [ 5]: https://www.ibtimes.com/jergens-lotion-recall-moisturizer-pulled-over-bacteria-contamination-risk-3444830?msclkid=1cfac34fa98e11ec9d3c6702fbd7cdb8 
The views expressed in any and all content distributed by Newstex and its re-distributors (collectively, the "Newstex Authoritative Content") are solely those of the respective author(s) and not necessarily the views of Newstex or its re-distributors. Stories from such authors are provided "AS IS," with no warranties, and confer no rights. The material and information provided in Newstex Authoritative Content are for general information only and should not, in any respect, be relied on as professional advice. Newstex Authoritative Content is not "read and approved" before it is posted. Accordingly, neither Newstex nor its re-distributors make any claims, promises or guarantees about the accuracy, completeness, or adequacy of the information contained therein or linked to from such content, nor do they take responsibility for any aspect of such content. The Newstex Authoritative Content shall be construed as author-based content and commentary. Accordingly, no warranties or other guarantees are offered as to the quality of the opinions, commentary or anything else appearing in such Newstex Authoritative Content. Newstex and its re-distributors expressly reserve the right to delete stories at its and their sole discretion.
 Load-Date: March 22, 2022

 

End of Document


Diabetes Drug Recall 2020: More Metformin Medication Recalled For Cancer-Causing Ingredient Levels
Newstex Blogs 
International Business Times News
June 12, 2020 Friday 2:50 PM EST

 Copyright 2020 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 415 words
Body




Jun 12, 2020( International Business Times News: http://www.ibtimes.com Delivered by Newstex)  In a fifth recall for the diabetes drug Metformin, Lupin Pharmaceuticals[1] has recalled Metformin Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets because they may contain N-Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) - a cancer-causing ingredient in levels higher than acceptable by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.The recalled prescription drug is used to improve blood glucose control in adults with Type 2 diabetes Melllitus. It was sold in a 500 mg dosage with a lot number of G901203 and packaged in 60-count bottles with an NDC number of 68180-336-07.The Metformin tablets were distributed nationwide to wholesalers, distributors, and mail-order pharmacies. 
Labels of the recalled medication can be viewed here[2].Consumers that have been prescribed the affected Metformin tablets are advised to continue taking the medication until an alternative treatment plan has been provided by their physician, pharmacist, or medical provider.Consumers that have questions about the recall can contact Inmar Rx Solutions, Inc. at 1-855-532-1856, Monday through Friday from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. EST. Reimbursement can be provided by Inmar with the lot number found on the side of the bottle.Lupin Pharmaceuticals said it has not received any reports of adverse effects from the recalled Metformin medication.Other recalls issued for the diabetes drug Metformin were made by Apotex Corp.[3], Teva Pharmaceuticals USA, Inc.[4], Marksans Pharma Limited[5], and Amneal Pharmaceuticals LLC[6]. four lifestyle tips to stop diabetes and keep blood sugars low Photo: stevepb - Pixabay [ 1]: https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts/lupin-pharmaceuticals-inc-issues-voluntarily-nationwide-recall-one-lot-metformin-hydrochloride [ 2]:            https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts/lupin-pharmaceuticals-inc-issues-voluntarily-nationwide-recall-one-lot-metformin-hydrochloride [ 3]:            https://www.ibtimes.com/diabetes-drug-recall-2020-metformin-recalled-over-cancer-risk-2984955 [ 4]:            https://www.ibtimes.com/diabetes-medication-recall-2020-more-metformin-recalled-cancer-fears-2988933 [ 5]:            https://www.ibtimes.com/diabetes-medication-recall-2020-another-recall-issued-metformin-over-possible-cancer-2989904 [ 6]:            https://www.ibtimes.com/diabetes-drug-recall-2020-another-metformin-medication-recalled-over-cancer-concerns-2986608 
 Load-Date: June 12, 2020

 

End of Document


DELAURO REITERATES CALL TO BAN RANITIDINE SALES, REINTRODUCES BILL TO GIVING FDA MANDATORY RECALL AUTHORITY OVER DRUGS
States News Service
January 10, 2020 Friday

 Copyright 2020 States News Service
Length: 428 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




The following information was released by the office of Connecticut Rep. Rosa DeLauro:
At a news conference today in the Capitol with medical experts, Congresswoman Rosa DeLauro (CT-03) reiterated her call to ban sales of ranitidinethe active ingredient in Zantacand reintroduced the Recall Unsafe Drugs Act. Her legislation would give the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) mandatory recall authority over drugs and homeopathic products.
Joining her at today's news conference were:
David Light, Founder and CEO of Valisure;
Joe Graedon, Pharmacologist and Co-Host of The People's Pharmacy on NPR; and
Dr. Jon Ernstoff, Gastroenterologist at MidState Medical Center in Connecticut
"The FDA's mission is to protect public health by assuring drugs, medical devices, and our nation's food supply are safe. Yet, every day, drugs and homeopathic products with significant evidence of safety concerns remain available to consumers across the country. That is unacceptable," said Congresswoman DeLauro. "The Recall Unsafe Drugs Act would enable the FDA to step in and issue a mandatory recall of products that have been found to cause serious health consequences or death. As Valisure and its research partners have found in their research, this problem extends to popular drugs like Zantac. People deserve to know that the medication they are using is safe. As a regulatory agency, the FDA needs to thoroughly review the safety of drugs before they come to market and while they are on the market. Anything short of that is a failure that puts lives at risk."
Late last year, DeLauro wrote a letter to (FDA) Commissioner Stephen Hahn and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Secretary Alex Azar to recall drugs containing ranitidine due to high levels of N-Nitrososdimethylamine ("NDMA"), a probable human carcinogen. A signed copy of the letter can be found here.
Currently, the FDA has mandatory recall authority over other products that the agency regulates, such as medical devices, food, and biological products. Unfortunately, when something goes wrong with drugs, the FDA has to rely on the good faith of drug manufactures to recall their products. More often than not, drug manufacturers heed the warnings of the FDA when products are causing harm. However, there are times when manufacturers refuse to recall their products, even in the face of overwhelming evidence suggesting that they are causing illness or even death to consumers. DeLauro's legislation would close this loophole and enable the FDA to step in and issue a mandatory recall.
###
 Load-Date: January 13, 2020

 

End of Document


DeLauro Reiterates Call to Ban Ranitidine Sales, Reintroduces Bill to Giving FDA Mandatory Recall Authority Over Drugs
Impact News Service
January 14, 2020 Tuesday

 Copyright 2020 Impact Media Limited All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 427 words
Body




Washington: Office of the MP Rosa DeLauro has issued the following news release:
At a news conference today in the Capitol with medical experts, Congresswoman Rosa DeLauro (CT-03) reiterated her call to ban sales of ranitidine—the active ingredient in Zantac—and reintroduced the Recall Unsafe Drugs Act. Her legislation would give the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) mandatory recall authority over drugs and homeopathic products.
Joining her at today’s news conference were:
David Light, Founder & CEO of Valisure; Joe Graedon, Pharmacologist and Co-Host of The People’s Pharmacy on NPR; and Dr. Jon Ernstoff, Gastroenterologist at MidState Medical Center in Connecticut
“The FDA’s mission is to protect public health by assuring drugs, medical devices, and our nation’s food supply are safe. Yet, every day, drugs and homeopathic products with significant evidence of safety concerns remain available to consumers across the country. That is unacceptable,” said Congresswoman DeLauro. “The Recall Unsafe Drugs Act would enable the FDA to step in and issue a mandatory recall of products that have been found to cause serious health consequences or death. As Valisure and its research partners have found in their research, this problem extends to popular drugs like Zantac. People deserve to know that the medication they are using is safe. As a regulatory agency, the FDA needs to thoroughly review the safety of drugs before they come to market and while they are on the market. Anything short of that is a failure that puts lives at risk.”
Late last year, DeLauro wrote a letter to (FDA) Commissioner Stephen Hahn and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Secretary Alex Azar to recall drugs containing ranitidine due to high levels of N-Nitrososdimethylamine (“NDMA”), a probable human carcinogen. A signed copy of the letter can be found here.
Currently, the FDA has mandatory recall authority over other products that the agency regulates, such as medical devices, food, and biological products. Unfortunately, when something goes wrong with drugs, the FDA has to rely on the good faith of drug manufactures to recall their products. More often than not, drug manufacturers heed the warnings of the FDA when products are causing harm. However, there are times when manufacturers refuse to recall their products, even in the face of overwhelming evidence suggesting that they are causing illness or even death to consumers. DeLauro’s legislation would close this loophole and enable the FDA to step in and issue a mandatory recall.
 Load-Date: January 15, 2020

 

End of Document


Peters Introduces Bill to Grant Food and Drug Administration Needed Authority to Recall Unsafe Drug Products, Protect Consumers; Sen. Gary C. Peters (D-MI) News Release
Congressional Documents and Publications
August 24, 2020

 Copyright 2020 Federal Information and News Dispatch, Inc.
Section: U.S. SENATE DOCUMENTS
Length: 569 words
Body




DETROIT, MI - U.S. Senator Gary Peters (MI), Ranking Member of the Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, today announced he introduced legislation that would grant the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) the authority to recall all unsafe drug products and help protect consumers. Currently, the FDA can only recommend that a company voluntarily recall a drug product, but it cannot require companies to recall these unsafe products. FDA, however, regularly publishes safety alerts relating to over-the-counter medications, prescription drugs, and other regulated drug products like hand sanitizer Recently, the FDA recommended the recall of over 100 hand sanitizer products containing methanol, which can be toxic to humans, but some companies failed to comply.
"Americans deserve to know that the medications and health products they are using are safe - whether it's prescriptions from their local pharmacy, over-the-counter medications, or hand sanitizer," said Senator Peters. "My commonsense bill would help protect Michiganders and people across the country from harmful or dangerous drug products by giving the FDA full authority to require companies to recall any unsafe drug product."
Peters' Safe Drugs Act would ensure that FDA's public safety recalls protect all consumers by requiring companies to pull unsafe drug products from stores and pharmacies. While companies generally agree to recall their products, recent instances where voluntary recalls have not happened highlight the need for this legislation. In situations where companies refuse to comply with FDA's request to recall an unsafe drug product, Americans' health and safety are at risk.
Peters' legislation grows out of findings from a report he issued last year that identified the consumer costs, public health risks, and national security threats posed by the United States' reliance on foreign manufacturing of drugs produced outside of the United States.
Below are statements in support of Senator Peters' legislation:
"Ensuring the safety of patients in Michigan hospitals has long been a key pillar of our work at the MHA. The Safe Drugs Act supports our mission-driven goal to provide only high-quality, safe care and drug products," said Michigan Health and Hospital Association CEO Brian Peters. "The MHA applauds Senator Peters' continued efforts to improve healthcare and, in this legislation, expand the FDA's recall authority to drug products. When there is a harmful product on the market, the FDA must have the ability to swiftly mandate a recall to protect patients in all care settings."
"Giving the FDA the authority to recall drug products is long overdue," said American Society of Health-System Pharmacists (ASHP) CEO Paul W. Abramowitz, Pharm.D., Sc.D. (Hon.), FASHP. "We applaud Senator Peters for taking action on this important reform to help ensure that patients receive safe drugs that improve health outcomes. Hospital and health-system pharmacists have consistently advocated for actions to continually improve drug safety, and for additional tools to help the FDA keep harmful products off the market. ASHP believes that the Safe Drugs Act is an important step in the right direction."
Read this original document at: https://www.peters.senate.gov/newsroom/press-releases/peters-introduces-bill-to-grant-food-and-drug-administration-needed-authority-to-recall-unsafe-drug-products-protect-consumers
 Load-Date: August 25, 2020

 

End of Document


Britney Spears' former bodyguard recalls tearful, drugged star
Newstex Blogs 
BANG ShowBiz
July 19, 2021 Monday 11:30 AM EST

 Copyright 2021 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 459 words
Body




Jul 19, 2021( BANG ShowBiz: http://www.bangshowbiz.com Delivered by Newstex)  
 Britney Spears' former bodyguard claims she was given a strong mix of prescription medication once a week. 
Fernando Flores - who was hired to work for the Toxic' hitmaker in 2010 but quit eight months later - told how the 39-year-old pop star's phone was monitored and she was banned from going out on her own, while visitors to her Los Angeles home had their bags searched. 
The former policeman claimed a woman would call to the property every Friday to hand over medication. 
He told The Sun newspaper: 'I'd explain [to Britney] what everything was — three anti-psychotic medications and birth control pills. 
'She'd go from sane to talking about parallel universes.' 
Fernando also told how Britney would be left in tears after being called multiple times a day by her father Jamie Spears, who is co-conservator of her financial affairs. 
He added: 'Jamie would call three or four times a day to check what was going on. 
'If she wanted something, she had to ask his permission. 
'She spent her days watching TV, or working out. 
'When down, she'd cry listening to [James Brown's] 'It's A Man's World'.' 
Last week, Britney broke down in tears during a court hearing and urged the judge to charge her father with "conservatorship abuse". 
She said: "I'm here to get rid of my dad and charge him with conservatorship abuse. This conservatorship has allowed my dad to ruin my life." 
The hearing also saw the 'Lucky' singer - who has been under a conservatorship since 2008 - granted permission to hire former federal prosecutor Mathew Rosengart as her lawyer after her court-appointed attorney Sam Ingham recently stood down from his post. 
And as part of her new lawyer Mathew's first job on the case, he has said he will be filing a subsequent petition for Jamie to be removed and for Britney to end the conservatorship. 
Last month, Britney claimed her conservatorship had left her "traumatised" and "depressed", and she called for her father Jamie to be jailed. 
She said: "They have me going to therapy three times a week and to a psychiatrist. 
"I truly believe this conservatorship is abusive. I don't feel like I can live a full life. In the meantime, I want this therapist to come to my home, I'm not willing to go to Westlake ... They set me up by sending me to the most exposed places. I need your help. 
"My dad and anyone involved in this conservatorship, including my management they should be in jail." 
Following the comments, Jamie's legal team released a statement which read: "He is sorry to see is daughter suffering and in so much pain. Mr Spears loves his daughter very much." 
Afterwards, a judge denied Britney's request for her father to be suspended as co-conservator. 
 Load-Date: July 19, 2021

 

End of Document


Ronnie Wood's stepson recalls young drug use
Newstex Blogs 
BANG ShowBiz
June 17, 2020 Wednesday 10:30 AM EST

 Copyright 2020 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 551 words
Body




Jun 17, 2020( BANG ShowBiz: http://www.bangshowbiz.com Delivered by Newstex)  Ronnie Wood's stepson started taking drugs when he was just nine years old.Jamie Wood used to help himself to cannabis cigarettes he found around the house after the parties thrown by his mother Jo Wood and her then-husband - who raised him from toddler age - and moved onto cocaine and heroin as a teenager.He said: "Mum and Dad (Ronnie) used to party a lot and you could always smell cannabis in the house. It would waft up the stairs and when I was nine or ten, I'd run downstairs and find ashtrays full of joints and help myself, then stash them behind the microphones."It was part and parcel of my upbringing. Drugs were normal in my family but outside they were demonised -- no one would let their children come to my house after school."Jamie - who overhauled his lifestyle after suffering a heart attack in 2017, aged just 42 - thinks he went off the rails because of his family's constant travelling.He said: "'The problem was, I went to 17 different schools in three or four different countries. 
Whenever I had friends, they suddenly got taken away."When the family moved to Wimbledon, south west London, Jamie fell in with the wrong crowd and was introduced to harder drugs, but finally felt like he belonged.He said: "I took heroin and cocaine. I was bad. I was partying hard."The entrepreneur insisted Ronnie and Jo knew about his drug habits and though he received warnings from the guitarist and his bandmate Keith Richards, no one ever helped him to quit.He told the Daily Mail newspaper: "Mum and Dad always knew about the drugs but were pretty aware that I was going to make my own decisions."I remember being 16 years old when we went on this holiday to Antigua. At this point I was doing drugs every day. I was sitting in my room and I get this knock on my door and it's Dad, who's come to chat to me about drugs. "He said, 'Do what you gotta do and have fun doing what you do but don't let the drugs control your life. You control the drugs!'"Stones band member Keith Richards also was aware of how hard I liked to party. He pulled me aside once and said, 'Jamie, there is a difference between itching your a*** and tearing it to pieces.'"I definitely had a few accidental slight overdoses as a kid. Although having plaque build-up in my artery and it causing a heart attack was probably more due to consistent smoking."Jamie quit hard drugs when he was 20, but continued to use cannabis for many years afterwards, which resulted in friction with Ronnie when the 73-year-old musician got sober a decade ago.Jamie said: "[Ronnie] went full AA, he liked to preach."I got upset with him -- the biggest drug-taker in the world was telling me what to do. I didn't take too kindly to it."I did recently apologise and tell him he was probably right and that I was in denial about the cannabis, but I thought he could have handled it better."Jamie - whose biological father is clothing boss Peter Greene - believes Ronnie and his current wife Sally will offer a much better upbringing to their four-year-old twins Alice and Gracie than he and siblings Jesse, Tyrone and Leah had.He said: "I'm sure he will do a better job this time round! I'm really happy for Ronnie. Sally is an awesome mum and the twins are great." 
 Load-Date: June 17, 2020

 

End of Document


Roundup: U.S. patients see wider drug recalls, limited price rise
Xinhua General News Service
February 4, 2023 Saturday 2:13 AM GMT

 Copyright 2023 Xinhua News Agency All Rights Reserved
Section: INTERNATIONAL NEWS
Length: 513 words
Byline: Xia Lin
Body




NEW YORK, Feb. 3 (Xinhua) -- More drugs were recalled last year in the United States and the annual price rise came with less impact this year, in the wake of three years of the COVID-19 pandemic with patients having to face a much paler health landscape. LARGEST RECALL More than 1,321 recalls were issued last year for human drug products that were defective or violated laws enforced by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), "the highest figure in the past three years," said USA TODAY upon its analysis of FDA data. 
Almost 90 percent of 2022 drug recalls were for problems the FDA said could cause a temporary health issue and posed only a slight threat of a serious nature, said the report. An additional 10 percent of recalls were for products the FDA said are unlikely to cause any adverse health reaction but ran afoul of FDA labeling or manufacturing laws, it noted. A total of 83 recalls last year were in the FDA's highest risk category, meaning they stemmed from drug problems the agency said "predictably could cause serious health problems or death," according to the report. Most recalls happened because either a company discovered a problem, or the FDA raised concerns. Only on very rare occasions does the FDA take legal action, typically against manufacturers that persist in marketing a defective product, said the newspaper. "Only 29 of the 14,732 recalls that were issued since 2012, when the data was first published, were mandated by the federal agency," it added. MILD PRICE RISE With pharmaceutical companies hiking prices on nearly 1,000 drugs in January, some consumers might experience sticker shock next time they pick up prescriptions. "Pharmaceutical companies raised list prices of 983 arthritis, cancer and other prescription drugs by an average of 5.6 percent at the start of this year -- restrained increases as the industry faces a new federal law aimed at lowering medicine costs," reported The Wall Street Journal (WSJ) on Friday. "The price increases come as a new federal law requires companies to pay Medicare a rebate if they increase prices above the rate of inflation," said USA TODAY at the end of the first month. Other Inflation Reduction Act provisions, such as capping Medicare recipients' out-of-pocket expenses at 2,000 U.S. dollars and allowing Medicare to negotiate the costliest drugs, haven't kicked in yet it noted. Drugmakers usually begin a new year by raising the list prices of their products. After several years taking increases of 10 percent or more on certain medicines, the companies have moderated their moves more recently. Major drug companies such as AbbVie, Pfizer and Bristol-Myers Squibb have raised prices so far, according to data provided by 46brooklyn Research, a nonprofit that researches drug pricing. Drug affordability remains a top worry for consumers. About 3 in 10 people don't take a drug as prescribed over concerns about cost -- some don't fill prescriptions, others skip doses or sought cheaper over-the-counter medication, according to a Kaiser Family Foundation poll last year. Enditem
 Load-Date: February 4, 2023

 

End of Document


Peters Introduces Bill to Grant Food and Drug Administration Needed Authority to Recall Unsafe Drug Products, Protect Consumers; Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee News Release
Congressional Documents and Publications
August 24, 2020

 Copyright 2020 Federal Information and News Dispatch, Inc.
Section: U.S. SENATE DOCUMENTS
Length: 568 words
Body




WASHINGTON, DC - U.S. Senator Gary Peters, Ranking Member of the Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee, today announced he introduced legislation that would grant the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) the authority to recall all unsafe drug products and help protect consumers. Currently, the FDA can only recommend that a company voluntarily recall a drug product, but it cannot require companies to recall these unsafe products. FDA, however, regularly publishes safety alerts relating to over-the-counter medications, prescription drugs, and other regulated drug products like hand sanitizer Recently, the FDA recommended the recall of over 100 hand sanitizer products containing methanol, which can be toxic to humans, but some companies failed to comply.
"Americans deserve to know that the medications and health products they are using are safe - whether it's prescriptions from their local pharmacy, over-the-counter medications, or hand sanitizer," said Senator Peters. "My commonsense bill would help protect Michiganders and people across the country from harmful or dangerous drug products by giving the FDA full authority to require companies to recall any unsafe drug product."
Peters' Safe Drugs Act would ensure that FDA's public safety recalls protect all consumers by requiring companies to pull unsafe drug products from stores and pharmacies. While companies generally agree to recall their products, recent instances where voluntary recalls have not happened highlight the need for this legislation. In situations where companies refuse to comply with FDA's request to recall an unsafe drug product, Americans' health and safety are at risk.
Peters' legislation grows out of findings from a report he issued last year that identified the consumer costs, public health risks, and national security threats posed by the United States' reliance on foreign manufacturing of drugs produced outside of the United States.
Below are statements in support of Senator Peters' legislation:
"Ensuring the safety of patients in Michigan hospitals has long been a key pillar of our work at the MHA. The Safe Drugs Act supports our mission-driven goal to provide only high-quality, safe care and drug products," said Michigan Health and Hospital Association CEO Brian Peters. "The MHA applauds Senator Peters' continued efforts to improve healthcare and, in this legislation, expand the FDA's recall authority to drug products. When there is a harmful product on the market, the FDA must have the ability to swiftly mandate a recall to protect patients in all care settings."
"Giving the FDA the authority to recall drug products is long overdue," said American Society of Health-System Pharmacists (ASHP) CEO Paul W. Abramowitz, Pharm.D., Sc.D. (Hon.), FASHP. "We applaud Senator Peters for taking action on this important reform to help ensure that patients receive safe drugs that improve health outcomes. Hospital and health-system pharmacists have consistently advocated for actions to continually improve drug safety, and for additional tools to help the FDA keep harmful products off the market. ASHP believes that the Safe Drugs Act is an important step in the right direction."
Read this original document at: https://www.hsgac.senate.gov/media/minority-media/peters-introduces-bill-to-grant-food-and-drug-administration-needed-authority-to-recall-unsafe-drug-products-protect-consumers
 Load-Date: August 25, 2020

 

End of Document


Family Dollar recalls 430 products including drugs, sunscreen stored at wrong temperatures
USA Today Online
July 22, 2022

 Copyright 2022 Gannett Media Corp  All Rights Reserved
Section: RETAIL INDUSTRY NEWS
Length: 461 words
Byline: Mike Snider, USA TODAY
Body




Family Dollar is recalling more than 430 products including pain relievers and cough syrup because the products were not stored at the proper temperature.
The discount retailer issued a voluntary recall of the products – the list also includes allergy pills, toothpaste, mouthwash, anti-perspirants, soap, dishwashing liquid, sunscreen and eye drops – after they were inadvertently shipped to stores across the U.S. from about May 1-June 10, according to the Food and Drug Administration.
Products recalled include name brands such as Alka Seltzer, Crest, Colgate, Dove, Old Spice, and Tylenol. 
Family Dollar stores that got the products have been notified and were told to discontinue sales of the products, the company said. So far, Family Dollar has received no consumer complaints or reports of illness related to the recalled products (see the complete list below).
Lawsuit: Dallas Taco Bell manager poured scalding water on customers over incorrect order
Exclusive: Hertz offers more settlements to rental customers claiming false car theft arrests
People who bought any of the affected products can return them to the Family Dollar store where they were purchased without a receipt. No Family Dollar stores in Delaware got products involved in the recall, and the company does not have any stores in Alaska or Hawaii, the FDA alert said.
Customers with questions can contact Family Dollar customer service at 844-636-7687 between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m. ET. Those who develop any health problems from the use of the products should contact their physician or health care provider; adverse reactions from the use of any recalled products can also be reported to the FDA's MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program.
USA TODAY has reached out to Family Dollar for further comment.
What's everyone talking about?Sign up for our trending newsletter to get the latest news of the day
Food recalls 101: How the chicken and salad mix get pulled from the shelves
<p style=" margin: 12px auto 6px
This isn't the first voluntary recall Family Dollar has initiated recently. In April 2022, the company recalled some skin care products which had been stored outside of labeled temperature requirements. 
In February 2022, Family Dollar recalled many products including drugs, cosmetics, dietary supplements, and human and pet foods distributed to hundreds of stores in the South after being stored in a rat-infested distribution facility in Arkansas.
Family Dollar's parent company Dollar Tree, which is based in Chesapeake, Virginia, operates more than 16,100 Dollar Tree and Family Dollar stores in North America. 
Follow Mike Snider on Twitter: @mikesnider.
This article originally appeared on USA TODAY: Family Dollar recalls 430 products including drugs, sunscreen stored at wrong temperatures
 Load-Date: July 22, 2022

 

End of Document


United States: Eye Drops Recalled After US Drug-Resistant Bacteria Outbreak
Thai News Service
February 6, 2023 Monday

 Copyright 2023 Thai News Service All Rights Reserved
Section: GENERAL NEWS
Length: 377 words
Body




U.S. health officials said Thursday a company is recalling its over-the-counter eye drops that have been linked to an outbreak of drug-resistant infections.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention this week sent a health alert to doctors, saying the outbreak included at least 55 people in 12 states. One died and at least five others had permanent vision loss.
The infections, including some found in blood, urine and lungs, were linked to EzriCare Artificial Tears. Many said they had used the product, which is a lubricant used to treat irritation and dryness.
The eye drops are sold under the name EzriCare and are made in India by Global Pharma Healthcare. The Food and Drug Administration said the company recalled unexpired lots of EzriCare Artificial Tears and another product, Delsam Pharma's Artificial Tears.
The FDA recommended the recall based on manufacturing problems including lack of testing and proper controls on packaging. The agency also blocked import into the United States.
The infections were caused by a bacteria called Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Investigators detected it in open EzriCare bottles, but further testing was underway.
EzriCare, the company that markets the eye drops in the U.S., said it is not aware of any evidence definitively linking the outbreak to the product, but that it has stopped distributing the eye drops. It also has a notice on its website urging consumers to stop using the product.
Infections were diagnosed in patients in California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Nevada, Texas, Utah, Washington and Wisconsin. A person in Washington died with a blood infection.
The outbreak is considered particularly worrisome because the bacteria driving it are resistant to standard antibiotics.
Investigators found the bacteria were not susceptible to any antibiotics routinely tested at public health laboratories. However, a newer antibiotic named cefiderocol seemed to work.
How could eye drops cause infections in the blood or lungs? The eye connects to the nasal cavity through the tear ducts. Bacteria can move from the nasal cavity into the lungs. Also, bacteria in these parts of the body can seed infections at other sites such as in the blood or wounds, CDC officials said. - VOA
 Load-Date: February 3, 2023

 

End of Document


Pfizer continues recalls of menopause drug Duavee on faulty packaging concerns
Pharma & Healthcare Monitor Worldwide
June 10, 2020 Wednesday

 Copyright 2020 Global Data Point. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 394 words
Body




Consumers are on edge as the COVID-19 pandemic casts doubts on the quality of drugs reaching shelves around the world. On U.S. shores, experts say those issues are warrantedand a wave of Pfizer recalls for menopause drug Duavee won't help build confidence.
Pfizer voluntarily recalled two batches of Duaveemarketed as Duavive abroadfrom U.K. shelves after identifying faulty packaging that may have reduced the drug's efficacy, the U.K.'s Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) said Monday.
Pfizer launched the recall after manufacturers identified a flaw in the drug's foil laminate pouch that introduced oxygen and lowered the dissolution rate of active pharmaceutical ingredient bazedoxifene acetate, the MHRA said.
The U.K. recalls comes just weeks after Pfizer voluntarily withdrew 11 lots of Duavee in the U.S. at the wholesaler level and two in Canada in late May, a Pfizer spokeswoman said.
The two recalled U.K. batches of 28-pack Duavive tablets expire in September 2020 and August 2021. Any remaining consumer stock should be quarantined and sent back to Pfizer for reimbursement, according to the MHRA.
In a recall notice dated May 20, Health Canada said Pfizer Canada would pull two affected lots of Duavive for issues with bazedoxifene dissolution.
The agency classified the recall as a Class II hazard, meaning "a situation in which the use of, or exposure to, a product may cause temporary adverse health consequences or where the probability of serious adverse health consequences is remote."
Duavee received an FDA approval in 2013 as a treatment for symptoms associated with menopause and osteoporosis.
Pfizer's recalls come as consumers grow increasingly concerned about drug quality during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Last week, independent testing laboratory Valisure's CEO David Light testified to U.S. senators that the pandemic would likely put a strain on the FDA's ability to adequately test the quality of drugs produced in foreign plants.
The FDA has maintained an effective ban on foreign inspections since March, only venturing inspectors into foreign manufacturing facilities for high-priority check-ins.
Meanwhile, the FDA in early June asked five drugmakers to voluntarily withdraw their versions of commonly used diabetes drug metformin off shelves after the agency identified high levels of NDMA contamination in tested lots.
 Load-Date: June 10, 2020

 

End of Document


Pfizer recalling popular stop-smoking drug Chantix over impurities
NBC - 4 WCMH (Columbus, Ohio)
July 19, 2021 Monday

 Copyright 2021 Media General Communications Holdings, LLC
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 339 words
Byline: Jocelina Joiner
Body




(NEXSTAR) — Pfizer is voluntarily recalling the anti-smoking drug Chantix, a brand of varenicline, due to impurities that exceed approved levels, the Food and Drug Administration has announced.
The recall includes two lots of Chantix 0.5 mg tablets, two lots of Chantix 1 mg tablets, and eight lots of a Chantix kit of 0.5mg/1 mg tablets that may have too much nitrosamine, N-nitroso-varenicline, based on the Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI) level established by Pfizer.
 "N-Nitroso-varenicline belongs to the nitrosamine class of compounds, some of which are classified as probable or possible human carcinogens (substances that could cause cancer), based on laboratory tests such as rodent carcinogenicity studies," the FDA has said.
 The FDA says there is no immediate risk to patients taking this medication, though long-term use "may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans." However, the FDA says the health benefits of quitting smoking outweigh the cancer risk from the impurity in varenicline.
 Chantix helps smokers quit and is intended for short-term use. According to the FDA, cigarette smokers are 15 to 30 times more likely to get lung cancer than non-smokers.
 The FDA said everyone is exposed to some level of nitrosamines, which are common in water and foods, including cured and grilled meats, dairy products and vegetables.
 "These impurities may increase the risk of cancer if people are exposed to them above acceptable levels over long periods of time," the FDA said.
 People taking Chantix should check with their doctor about whether they received an affected lot, and if appropriate, about alternative treatments. Pfizer has received no reports of "adverse events" related to this recall.
 The FDA provided the following table that includes the national drug code (NDC), lot number, expiration date, and configuration details for Chantix tablets. The product lots were distributed across the U.S. and Puerto Rico from June 2019 to June 2021.
 For more information, go to the FDA website.
 Load-Date: July 21, 2021

 

End of Document


Pfizer recalling popular stop-smoking drug Chantix over impurities
CBS - 11 WJHL (Johnson City, Tennessee)
July 19, 2021 Monday

 Copyright 2021 Media General Communications Holdings, LLC
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: CONSUMER
Length: 339 words
Byline: Jocelina Joiner
Body




(NEXSTAR) -- Pfizer is voluntarily recalling the anti-smoking drug Chantix, a brand of varenicline, due to impurities that exceed approved levels, the Food and Drug Administration has announced.
The recall includes two lots of Chantix 0.5 mg tablets, two lots of Chantix 1 mg tablets, and eight lots of a Chantix kit of 0.5mg/1 mg tablets that may have too much nitrosamine, N-nitroso-varenicline, based on the Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI) level established by Pfizer.
 "N-Nitroso-varenicline belongs to the nitrosamine class of compounds, some of which are classified as probable or possible human carcinogens (substances that could cause cancer), based on laboratory tests such as rodent carcinogenicity studies," the FDA has said.
 The FDA says there is no immediate risk to patients taking this medication, though long-term use "may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans." However, the FDA says the health benefits of quitting smoking outweigh the cancer risk from the impurity in varenicline.
 Chantix helps smokers quit and is intended for short-term use. According to the FDA, cigarette smokers are 15 to 30 times more likely to get lung cancer than non-smokers.
 The FDA said everyone is exposed to some level of nitrosamines, which are common in water and foods, including cured and grilled meats, dairy products and vegetables.
 "These impurities may increase the risk of cancer if people are exposed to them above acceptable levels over long periods of time," the FDA said.
 People taking Chantix should check with their doctor about whether they received an affected lot, and if appropriate, about alternative treatments. Pfizer has received no reports of "adverse events" related to this recall.
 The FDA provided the following table that includes the national drug code (NDC), lot number, expiration date, and configuration details for Chantix tablets. The product lots were distributed across the U.S. and Puerto Rico from June 2019 to June 2021.
 For more information, go to the FDA website.
 Load-Date: July 20, 2021

 

End of Document


Drugs Recall: Company Pulling Dozens Of Human, Animal Meds After Filing For Bankruptcy
Newstex Blogs 
International Business Times News
April 27, 2023 Thursday 10:35 AM EST

 Delivered by Newstex LLC. All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2023 International Business Times News 
Length: 477 words
Byline: Athena Chan
Body




KEY POINTS
 The company is recalling dozens of human and animal drug products
 It shut down its Quality program upon filing for bankruptcy
 The recall affects products like artificial tears and Lidocaine ointment
 For more breaking global news visit IBTimes.com
 A company is voluntarily recalling various drugs for humans and animals after filing for bankruptcy. It will reportedly no longer be able to guarantee the quality of the products.
 Akorn Operating Company filed for bankruptcy on Feb. 23, according to the company announcement  on the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) website. Since then, it has stopped all operations and terminated all its employees at U.S. sites. This move includes halting its Quality program.
"The discontinuation of the Quality program would result in the company's inability to assure that products meet the identity, strength, quality and purity characteristics that they are purported or represented to possess which render the products adulterated," the announcement noted. "While specific risks to patients, from use of these adulterated products, cannot always be identified or assessed, it is also not possible to rule out patient risks resulting from the use of such products."
 There have been no reports of adverse reactions related to the use of the products.
 The recall affects quite a handful of within-expiry products for human or animal use. For instance, the multi-page list  of human products includes all lots and NDCs of its Artificial Tears, Lidocaine Ointment, Calcipotriene Scalp Solution, 0.005%, Clobetasol Propionate Shampoo, 0.05% and Fluticasone Propionate Nasal Spray, among dozens of other human products.
 On the other hand, the list of affected veterinary products  includes all lots and NDCs of products like Vetaket 100 mg/mL Injection (ketamine HCl) and Proparacaine HCl Ophthalmic Solution, 0.5%, among others.
 These products are said to have been distributed nationwide, including to wholesalers, retailers and even to consumers via the internet. Distributors and consignees have been notified of the recall  and are being requested to inform their customers of the issuance.
 Customers with questions about the recall may contact Akorn at (800) 932-5676. On the other hand, those who have had problems — whether themselves or the animals in their care — relating to the use of the product are being advised to contact their health care provider or veterinarian.
 Akorn had been "running at a loss for some time," company CEO Douglas Boothe wrote  in a previous letter to employees about the layoff and company shutdown. In it, Boothe mentioned the hurdles that the company had been facing, including efforts to sell the company back in 2022 — efforts that unfortunately did not come to fruition.
"I truly regret that these actions have become necessary," Boothe noted.
Link to the original story.
 Notes



The views expressed in any and all content distributed by Newstex and its re-distributors (collectively, the "Newstex Authoritative Content") are solely those of the respective author(s) and not necessarily the views of Newstex or its re-distributors. Stories from such authors are provided "AS IS," with no warranties, and confer no rights. The material and information provided in Newstex Authoritative Content are for general information only and should not, in any respect, be relied on as professional advice. Newstex Authoritative Content is not "read and approved" before it is posted. Accordingly, neither Newstex nor its re-distributors make any claims, promises or guarantees about the accuracy, completeness, or adequacy of the information contained therein or linked to from such content, nor do they take responsibility for any aspect of such content. The Newstex Authoritative Content shall be construed as author-based content and commentary. Accordingly, no warranties or other guarantees are offered as to the quality of the opinions, commentary or anything else appearing in such Newstex Authoritative Content. Newstex and its re-distributors expressly reserve the right to delete stories at its and their sole discretion.
 Load-Date: May 25, 2023

 

End of Document


Pfizer recalling popular stop-smoking drug Chantix over impurities
FOX - 2 KTVI (St. Louis)
July 19, 2021 Monday

 Copyright 2021 Local TV LLC
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL
Length: 339 words
Byline: Jocelina Joiner
Body




(NEXSTAR) - Pfizer is voluntarily recalling the anti-smoking drug Chantix, a brand of varenicline, due to impurities that exceed approved levels, the Food and Drug Administration has announced.
The recall includes two lots of Chantix 0.5 mg tablets, two lots of Chantix 1 mg tablets, and eight lots of a Chantix kit of 0.5mg/1 mg tablets that may have too much nitrosamine, N-nitroso-varenicline, based on the Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI) level established by Pfizer.
 "N-Nitroso-varenicline belongs to the nitrosamine class of compounds, some of which are classified as probable or possible human carcinogens (substances that could cause cancer), based on laboratory tests such as rodent carcinogenicity studies," the FDA has said.
 The FDA says there is no immediate risk to patients taking this medication, though long-term use "may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans." However, the FDA says the health benefits of quitting smoking outweigh the cancer risk from the impurity in varenicline.
 Chantix helps smokers quit and is intended for short-term use. According to the FDA, cigarette smokers are 15 to 30 times more likely to get lung cancer than non-smokers.
 The FDA said everyone is exposed to some level of nitrosamines, which are common in water and foods, including cured and grilled meats, dairy products and vegetables.
 "These impurities may increase the risk of cancer if people are exposed to them above acceptable levels over long periods of time," the FDA said.
 People taking Chantix should check with their doctor about whether they received an affected lot, and if appropriate, about alternative treatments. Pfizer has received no reports of "adverse events" related to this recall.
 The FDA provided the following table that includes the national drug code (NDC), lot number, expiration date, and configuration details for Chantix tablets. The product lots were distributed across the U.S. and Puerto Rico from June 2019 to June 2021.
 For more information, go to the FDA website.
 Load-Date: July 20, 2021

 

End of Document


Rep. DeLauro Celebrates FDA Mandatory Drug Recall Authority in America Creating Opportunities for Manufacturing, Pre-Eminence in Technology, and Economic Strength Act
Targeted News Service
February 5, 2022 Saturday 9:40 AM  EST

 Copyright 2022 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 553 words
Byline: Targeted News Service
Dateline: WASHINGTON 
Body




Rep. Rosa L. DeLauro, D-Connecticut, issued the following news release on Feb. 4, 2022:
House Appropriations Committee Chair Rosa DeLauro (D-CT-03) today celebrated the inclusion of a provision in the America COMPETES Act to give the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) mandatory recall authority over drug products.
"For years, I have fought to advance legislation - the Recall Unsafe Drugs Act - giving the FDA mandatory recall authority over drugs so the Agency can fully use its regulatory authority to protect public health," said Congresswoman DeLauro. "I am pleased the America COMPETES Act includes this expanded authority; authority the Agency already has over foods, medical devices, and biological products. FDA's lack of mandatory drug recall authority has real-world consequences. Even if dangerous products that pose serious risks to consumers are discovered, the Agency can only request a recall. Companies can - and do - refuse voluntary recalls. That is unconscionable and puts people at risk. That is why I am committed to ensuring FDA receives this expanded authority and has the resources to mandate recalls of unsafe drugs."
"At Valisure, we applaud Congresswoman Rosa DeLauro for tirelessly advocating for the FDA to acquire mandatory recall authority over drugs and, ultimately, add this matter to the COMPETES Act," said Chief Executive Officer of Valisure David Light. "We strongly support efforts that can improve the quality of the U.S. drug supply, which is heavily reliant on a complex, global, and increasingly vulnerable supply chain. We hope the FDA will utilize its new authority in conjunction with the proven impact of independent testing, which has identified multiple adulterated products and industry-wide quality concerns. The combination of increased vigilance and independent quality assurance throughout the supply chain with enhanced regulatory authority has the potential to significantly diminish the unnecessary risk to consumers from contaminated or otherwise adulterated products. We encourage the FDA and Congress to continue taking actions in support of improving drug quality and the robustness of the global supply chain."
DeLauro first introduced legislation to give FDA mandatory recall authority over drugs in 2017 following the death of 10 children associated with Hyland's teething tablets. Overall, the teething tablets were linked to more than 400 adverse event reports in children including death, seizures, shortness of breath, and tremors. Despite the FDA issuing several safety warnings on the dangers of homeopathic teething products, the manufacturer refused to recall its products. That refusal left deadly products in the homes of unsuspecting parents who were still, unknowingly, giving it to their children.
Recently, DeLauro secured similar language to give FDA mandatory recall authority over drugs in the Fiscal Year 2021 Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies spending bill. That summer, a foreign manufacturer of hand sanitizers refused a voluntary recall request after the FDA discovered they were potentially contaminated with methanol, a toxic, life-threatening substance that can be absorbed through the skin or accidentally ingested by children.
Copyright Targeted News Services
MSTRUCK-7736549 MSTRUCK
 Load-Date: February 5, 2022

 

End of Document


Pfizer recalling popular stop-smoking drug Chantix over impurities
FOX - 4 WDAF (Kansas City, Missouri)
July 19, 2021 Monday

 Copyright 2021 Local TV LLC
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 337 words
Byline: Nexstar Media Wire
Body




Pfizer is voluntarily recalling the anti-smoking drug Chantix, a brand of varenicline, due to impurities that exceed approved levels, the Food and Drug Administration has announced.
The recall includes two lots of Chantix 0.5 mg tablets, two lots of Chantix 1 mg tablets, and eight lots of a Chantix kit of 0.5mg/1 mg tablets that may have too much nitrosamine, N-nitroso-varenicline, based on the Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI) level established by Pfizer.
 "N-Nitroso-varenicline belongs to the nitrosamine class of compounds, some of which are classified as probable or possible human carcinogens (substances that could cause cancer), based on laboratory tests such as rodent carcinogenicity studies," the FDA has said.
 The FDA says there is no immediate risk to patients taking this medication, though long-term use "may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans." However, the FDA says the health benefits of quitting smoking outweigh the cancer risk from the impurity in varenicline.
 Chantix helps smokers quit and is intended for short-term use. According to the FDA, cigarette smokers are 15 to 30 times more likely to get lung cancer than non-smokers.
 The FDA said everyone is exposed to some level of nitrosamines, which are common in water and foods, including cured and grilled meats, dairy products and vegetables.
 "These impurities may increase the risk of cancer if people are exposed to them above acceptable levels over long periods of time," the FDA said.
 People taking Chantix should check with their doctor about whether they received an affected lot, and if appropriate, about alternative treatments. Pfizer has received no reports of "adverse events" related to this recall.
 The FDA provided the following table that includes the national drug code (NDC), lot number, expiration date, and configuration details for Chantix tablets. The product lots were distributed across the U.S. and Puerto Rico from June 2019 to June 2021.
 For more information, go to the FDA website.
 Graphic



 
Chantix (Credit: FDA)
 Load-Date: July 24, 2021

 

End of Document


Pfizer recalling popular stop-smoking drug Chantix over impurities
CBS - 3 WREG (Memphis, Tennessee)
July 20, 2021 Tuesday

 Copyright 2021 Local TV LLC
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 350 words
Byline: Nexstar Media Wire
Body




(NEXSTAR) — Pfizer is voluntarily recalling the anti-smoking drug Chantix, a brand of varenicline, due to impurities that exceed approved levels, the Food and Drug Administration has announced.
The recall includes two lots of Chantix 0.5 mg tablets, two lots of Chantix 1 mg tablets, and eight lots of a Chantix kit of 0.5mg/1 mg tablets that may have too much nitrosamine, N-nitroso-varenicline, based on the Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI) level established by Pfizer.
 "N-Nitroso-varenicline belongs to the nitrosamine class of compounds, some of which are classified as probable or possible human carcinogens (substances that could cause cancer), based on laboratory tests such as rodent carcinogenicity studies," the FDA has said.
 The FDA says there is no immediate risk to patients taking this medication, though long-term use "may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans." However, the FDA says the health benefits of quitting smoking outweigh the cancer risk from the impurity in varenicline.
 Chantix helps smokers quit and is intended for short-term use. According to the FDA, cigarette smokers are 15 to 30 times more likely to get lung cancer than non-smokers.
 J&J recalling Aveeno, Neutrogena sunscreens due to benzene traces
 The FDA said everyone is exposed to some level of nitrosamines, which are common in water and foods, including cured and grilled meats, dairy products and vegetables.
 "These impurities may increase the risk of cancer if people are exposed to them above acceptable levels over long periods of time," the FDA said.
 People taking Chantix should check with their doctor about whether they received an affected lot, and if appropriate, about alternative treatments. Pfizer has received no reports of "adverse events" related to this recall.
 The FDA provided the following table that includes the national drug code (NDC), lot number, expiration date, and configuration details for Chantix tablets. The product lots were distributed across the U.S. and Puerto Rico from June 2019 to June 2021.
 For more information, go to the FDA website.
 Graphic



 
Chantix (Credit: FDA)
 Load-Date: July 25, 2021

 

End of Document


US authorities recall eyedrops infected with drug-resistant bacteria
The Guardian (London)
March 17, 2023 Friday 7:36 PM GMT

 Copyright 2023 The Guardian, a division of Transcontinental Media Group Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Section: SOCIETY; Version:1
Length: 384 words
Byline: Edward Helmore in New York
Highlight: Contamination may have killed one person and injured others, some of whom had eyes removed
Body




US authorities have recalled a brand of eyedrops contaminated with a drug-resistant bacterial contamination that may have killed one person and injured 68 others, a small number of whom have to have the affected eye surgically removed.
Both the Food and Drug Administration and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) issued an advisory  against the use of EzriCare Artificial Tears, warning that they may be linked to an outbreak of Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
The Pseudomonas bacteria can cause infections in the blood, lungs or other parts of the body after surgery. The multi drug-resistant bacteria causes an estimated 32,600 infections among hospitalized patients and 2,700 estimated deaths in the US a year, according to a 2019 CDC report. 
Last month, the FDA issued a voluntary recall  of the Global Pharma brand, warning it was linked to hospitalization and blindness. It advised consumers to stop using the brand and return them to the place of purchase.
The agencies reported cases reported across 12 states – California, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Nevada, Texas, Utah, Washington and Wisconsin – from May last year to February.
Ten different brands of eyedrops were initially linked to the outbreak of the rare strain of infection that had not been experienced in the US before, with the drops having been manufactured in India and imported to the US. The FDA has also recalled  eyedrops distributed by Pharmedica and Apotex.
Most patients diagnosed with Pseudomonas aeruginosa reported using eyedrops or artificial tears. The CDC said bottles belonging to patients were found to contain Pseudomonas.
In addition to the one death, eight patients have suffered vision loss, and four have had eyes surgically removed. Common symptoms include yellow, green or clear discharge from the eye, discomfort or pain, redness, blurry vision and increased sensitivity to light.
A spokesman for EzriCare said last month that the company was “not aware of any testing that definitively links the Pseudomonas aeruginosa outbreak to EzriCare Artificial Tears”. But it said it had taken action to stop distribution of the product.
“To the greatest extent possible, we have been contacting customers to advise them against continued use of the product,” the company added. 
 Load-Date: March 17, 2023

 

End of Document


Pfizer recalling popular stop-smoking drug Chantix over impurities
NBC - 3 WSAV (Savannah, GA)
July 19, 2021 Monday

 Copyright 2021 Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc.
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: HEALTH NEWS
Length: 339 words
Byline: Jocelina Joiner
Body




(NEXSTAR) — Pfizer is voluntarily recalling the anti-smoking drug Chantix, a brand of varenicline, due to impurities that exceed approved levels, the Food and Drug Administration has announced.
The recall includes two lots of Chantix 0.5 mg tablets, two lots of Chantix 1 mg tablets, and eight lots of a Chantix kit of 0.5mg/1 mg tablets that may have too much nitrosamine, N-nitroso-varenicline, based on the Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI) level established by Pfizer.
 "N-Nitroso-varenicline belongs to the nitrosamine class of compounds, some of which are classified as probable or possible human carcinogens (substances that could cause cancer), based on laboratory tests such as rodent carcinogenicity studies," the FDA has said.
 The FDA says there is no immediate risk to patients taking this medication, though long-term use "may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans." However, the FDA said the health benefits of quitting smoking outweigh the cancer risk from the impurity in varenicline.
 Chantix helps smokers quit and is intended for short-term use. According to the FDA, cigarette smokers are 15 to 30 times more likely to get lung cancer than non-smokers.
 The FDA said everyone is exposed to some level of nitrosamines, which are common in water and foods, including cured and grilled meats, dairy products and vegetables.
 "These impurities may increase the risk of cancer if people are exposed to them above acceptable levels over long periods of time," the FDA said.
 People taking Chantix should check with their doctor about whether they received an affected lot, and if appropriate, about alternative treatments. Pfizer has received no reports of "adverse events" related to this recall.
 The FDA provided the following table that includes the national drug code (NDC), lot number, expiration date, and configuration details for Chantix tablets. The product lots were distributed across the U.S. and Puerto Rico from June 2019 to June 2021.
 For more information, go to the FDA website.
 Graphic



 
Chantix (Credit: FDA)
 Load-Date: July 20, 2021

 

End of Document


What to Recall When Getting Drugs Online
Web newswire
August 8, 2020 Saturday

 Copyright 2020 WebNewsWire All Rights Reserved
Length: 630 words
Dateline: New Delhi 
Body




New Delhi, Aug. 8 -- Ordering drugs online is actually a pretty rapid and easy practice. Lots of online pharmacies present less expensive counterparts for the growing rates of offline pharmacies. These reduced rates are particularly handy for those with no a comprehensive or no health insurance coverage. Having said that, ordering for any reduce price is only handy after you acquire from a genuine drug store. Many online pharmacies never really supply the drugs they claim. When they've obtained your pay, you are going to in no way hear from them again. Listed here are some tips you can follow prior to ordering a big quantity of medicines from an Internet pharmacy. Get a lot more facts about pain killers
Conduct Your Investigation
Generally refer to online pharmacy review sites to know one of the most trusted companies. Reading by way of these feedback will provide you with a clear picture which site you can truly trust. Other review sites include price tag evaluations among different medicine companies. The prices will constantly vary among these different drug stores, whether offline or from the net. Evaluate all of the costs offered to know which present is value for your money.
Double Verify its Authenticity
A trusted Internet drug shop advertises it includes a licensed pharmacist. The licensed pharmacist is in charge of answering your queries or clarifications concerning the drugs marketed. The company need to also require the buyers to provide a doctor's prescribed note. The note is normally sent via e mail, standard mail, or via fax. This delivery will verify and authorize your purchase for the medicines. The pharmacy should really follow this precaution since it really is unlawful to send an individual prescribed drugs devoid of clinical authorization.
In addition to these authorizations, the pharmacy must be authorized by the National Association of Boards of Pharmacy (NABP). The NABP is marked by a blue oval seal that states "VIPPS," defined as Verified Internet Pharmacy Practice Site. You may also stop by the NABP's website for their record of authorized drug shops online.
Scheduling
Count on that your acquire will involve 2 weeks of evaluation. Just after it has been processed, you'll wait a few business days ahead of it arrives at your doorstep. The rather prolonged system tends to make Internet drug orders much more suitable for large orders. If your order is delivered not on schedule, count on to spent out of the pocket to get a fill-in order. Prescription plans ordinarily don't involve above the prescribed quantity.
Be Cautious
Certain government laws consider buying from foreign online pharmacies illegal. Be certain the pharmacy you purchase from is authorized by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). The FDA has stopped foreign pharmacy businesses which sent Americans counterfeit or dangerously created medicines. See if your region features a setup major you to authorized foreign drug shops. Several Internet American consumers acquire from Canadian drug websites.
Normally be cautious when shopping for from online pharmacies. Search for pharmacies with a steady base of buyers, depending on online pharmacy review websites. Preserve away from websites that have to have untraceable payment indicates. You could end up regretting ordering online inside the initial spot. It's clearly easier to get offline when the pharmacy doesn't deliver trusted services and products. As soon as you've picked the ideal pharmacy, you are able to save extra cash for other requirements and advantage from the ease on the process.
Published by HT Digital Content Services with permission from Web Newswire. For any query with respect to this article or any other content requirement, please contact Editor at contentservices@htlive.com
 Load-Date: August 8, 2020

 

End of Document


Pfizer recalling popular stop-smoking drug Chantix over impurities
FOX - 8 WGHP (High Point, Greensboro, Winston-Salem, North Carolina)
July 19, 2021 Monday

 Copyright 2021 Local TV LLC
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 366 words
Byline: Jocelina Joiner
Body




(NEXSTAR) -- Pfizer is voluntarily recalling the anti-smoking drug Chantix, a brand of varenicline, due to impurities that exceed approved levels, the Food and Drug Administration has announced.
The recall includes two lots of Chantix 0.5 mg tablets, two lots of Chantix 1 mg tablets, and eight lots of a Chantix kit of 0.5mg/1 mg tablets that may have too much nitrosamine, N-nitroso-varenicline, based on the Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI) level established by Pfizer.
 Find out first — Get the latest breaking news from FOX8 sent straight to your inbox.
 "N-Nitroso-varenicline belongs to the nitrosamine class of compounds, some of which are classified as probable or possible human carcinogens (substances that could cause cancer), based on laboratory tests such as rodent carcinogenicity studies," the FDA has said.
 The FDA says there is no immediate risk to patients taking this medication, though long-term use "may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans." However, the FDA says the health benefits of quitting smoking outweigh the cancer risk from the impurity in varenicline.
 Chantix helps smokers quit and is intended for short-term use. According to the FDA, cigarette smokers are 15 to 30 times more likely to get lung cancer than non-smokers.
 NEXT --> J&J recalling Aveeno, Neutrogena sunscreens due to benzene traces
 The FDA said everyone is exposed to some level of nitrosamines, which are common in water and foods, including cured and grilled meats, dairy products and vegetables.
 "These impurities may increase the risk of cancer if people are exposed to them above acceptable levels over long periods of time," the FDA said.
 People taking Chantix should check with their doctor about whether they received an affected lot, and if appropriate, about alternative treatments. Pfizer has received no reports of "adverse events" related to this recall.
 The FDA provided the following table that includes the national drug code (NDC), lot number, expiration date, and configuration details for Chantix tablets. The product lots were distributed across the U.S. and Puerto Rico from June 2019 to June 2021.
 For more information, go to the FDA website.
 Load-Date: July 21, 2021

 

End of Document


Indian drug firms recall various products in US market
Indian Economic & Political news
November 19, 2020 Thursday

 Copyright 2020 Indian Economic & Political news All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 509 words
Dateline: New Delhi, 2020-11-19 17:06:59 
Body




 November 19 -- Indian drug firms like Marksans Pharma, Aurobindo Pharma, Zydus and Jubilant are recalling products in the US market, as per the latest enforcement report by the US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA).
 
While Markson's Pharma is recalling diabetes drug,  Zydus Pharmaceuticals (USA) is recalling drug which is used to reduce stomach acid. Similarly, Aurobindo Pharma (USA) is recalling pain-relieving drug, while Jubilant Cadista is recalling a medication used to treat schizophrenia.
As per the USFDA, Marksans Pharma is recalling close to six lakh bottles of diabetes drug Metformin Hydrochloride extended-release tablets in strengths of 500 mg and 750 mg in the US market.
The medication lot has been manufactured at the company's Goa-based manufacturing facility.
As per the USFDA, the company is recalling the product due to deviation from the current good manufacturing practices (CGMP).
"FDA analysis detected N-Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) impurity above the acceptable intake level," it noted.
 
NDMA has been defined as a probable human carcinogen.
Metformin Hydrochloride extended-release tablet is a prescription oral medication indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve blood glucose control in adults with type-2 diabetes mellitus.
Various companies across the globe have announced similar recalls for the product after the USFDA pointed out the presence of NDMA above permissible limits.
FDA's testing has shown elevated levels of NDMA in some extended-release (ER) metformin formulation, but not in the immediate release (IR) formulation or in the active pharmaceutical ingredient.
NDMA is classified as a probable human carcinogen based on results from laboratory tests. It is a known environmental contaminant and found in water and food, including meats, dairy products and vegetables.
 
Further, the USFDA said Zydus Pharmaceuticals (USA) is recalling  14,748 cartons of Lansoprazole delayed-release orally disintegrating tablets due to failed dissolution specification. The product has been manufactured by Ahmedabad-based Cadila Healthcare.
The USFDA has classified the initiatives taken by Marksans and Zydus as class II recalls.
As per the USFDA, a class II recall is initiated in a situation in which use of, or exposure to, a violative product may cause temporary or medically reversible adverse health consequences or where the probability of serious adverse health consequences is remote.
Further, the US health regulator said Aurobindo Pharma USA is recalling 7,440 bottles of Ibuprofen oral suspension drug for labelling error.
Besides, Jubilant Cadista Pharmaceuticals, Inc is recalling 23,616 blister packs of Olanzapine orally disintegrating tablets for being "sub potent", the USFDA noted.
 
The recalled lot has been produced by Roorkee-based (Uttarakhand) Jubilant Generics.
The US health regulator classified both the recalls as class III.
As per the USFDA, a class III recall is initiated in a "situation in which use of, or exposure to, a violative product is not likely to cause adverse health consequences".
 Load-Date: November 19, 2020

 

End of Document


Drug sold on Amazon recalled. ‘Hidden drug ingredients’ can cause death and diarrhea
WebNews - Academic
Fresno Bee
https://www.fresnobee.com/news/recalls/article296074359.html November 25, 2024 Monday


Length: 331 words
Body



One lot of a drug sold as a “dietary supplement” has been recalled after the FDA confirmed it has two undeclared “hidden ingredients” that can cause death,...

 

End of Document


Drug sold on Amazon recalled. ‘Hidden drug ingredients’ can cause death and diarrhea
WebNews - Academic
South Carolina State
https://www.thestate.com/news/recalls/article296074359.html November 25, 2024 Monday


Length: 331 words
Body



One lot of a drug sold as a “dietary supplement” has been recalled after the FDA confirmed it has two undeclared “hidden ingredients” that can cause death,...

 

End of Document


Drug sold on Amazon recalled. ‘Hidden drug ingredients’ can cause death and diarrhea
WebNews - Academic
KansasCity.com
https://www.kansascity.com/news/recalls/article296074359.html November 25, 2024 Monday


Length: 314 words
Body



One lot of a drug sold as a “dietary supplement” has been recalled after the FDA confirmed it has two undeclared “hidden ingredients” that can...

 

End of Document


Drug sold on Amazon recalled. ‘Hidden drug ingredients’ can cause death and diarrhea
WebNews - Academic
Sacramento Bee
https://www.sacbee.com/news/recalls/article296074359.html November 25, 2024 Monday


Length: 342 words
Body



One lot of a drug sold as a “dietary supplement” has been recalled after the FDA confirmed it has two undeclared “hidden ingredients” that can cause death, internal...

 

End of Document


Common anxiety drug taken by millions recalled over 'life-threatening' label mistake
MailOnline
November 21, 2024 Thursday 1:36 PM GMT

 Copyright 2024 Associated Newspapers Ltd. All Rights Reserved
 
Section: HEALTH; Version:1
Length: 548 words
Byline: Luke Andrews Senior Health Reporter For Dailymail.Com
Body




•	READ MORE: More than 300,000 kidney meds recalled across US
A popular anxiety drug taken by nearly 2million Americans is being recalled nationwide over a 'life-threatening' packaging error.
Sixteen lots of the anti-anxiety drug clonazepam, sold under the brand name Par Pharmaceutical, are being recalled because they were printed with the wrong dosage strength on the label.
The recall, issued by the manufacturer Endo Inc., affects 0.125 milligrams (mg), 0.25mg, 1mg and 2mg prescriptions of clonazepam orally disintegrating tablets.
The incorrect dosing strength is printed on the carton the drugs are sold in, with the correct dose printed on the blister strips and tablets inside. 
Endo has warned patients to stop taking the recalled products immediately, saying there was a 'reasonable probability' they could suffer 'life-threatening respiratory depression,' when breathing becomes dangerously slow.
Patients on the maximum dosage of clonazepam (2mg), those with pulmonary disease or who take other drugs that can cause respiratory depression are said to be most at risk.
                     Pennsylvania-based Endo has blamed an unnamed 'third-party packager' for the error.
There have been no reports of serious adverse events as a result of the error, the company said.
This is just the latest drug recall to hit the US, after 300,000 medications for kidney conditions were recalled last week over fears they could be contaminated with a cancer-causing ingredient, and antidepressants were recalled last month over fears they contained a chemical used in rocket fuel.
Patients who have the drug are being urged to throw it away immediately and to contact their pharmacy for a replacement.
Those who have ingested the recalled pills should contact their doctor immediately.
A total of 16 lots of the medication have been recalled, with each package containing 60 tablets packed in 10 blister strips each containing six pills.
It is not clear how many packages were are in a single lot.
Patients are being urged to check their medication's lot number, found printed on the blister strips, to find out whether their dose is recalled. 
A list of the lot numbers can be found here.
In its voluntary recall, also published by the FDA, the manufacturer said: 'Children and adults who inadvertently consume a higher dose of Clonazepam could be at increased risk for the adverse events of significant sedation, confusion, dizziness, diminished reflexes, ataxia and hypotonia.'
Ataxia is loss of muscle coordination, leading to clumsy movements, and hypotonia is decreased muscle resistance to movement, making them appear floppy.
The manufacturer added: 'There is reasonable probability for significant, possibly life-threatening, respiratory distress.
'[This is] especially for patients with concomitant pulmonary disease, patients who have prescribed dosing near maximal dosing and patients also taking other medications that could cause additional respiratory distress.'
Clonazepam is commonly prescribed to treat seizures, epilepsy and panic disorders, a type of anxiety.
It works by raising levels of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) in the brain, which helps to calm the nerve system and cause muscles to relax.
There are more than 23million prescriptions of the medication written in the US every year. 
 Load-Date: November 21, 2024

 

End of Document


Pfizer Recall: Another Blood Pressure Drug Pulled Over Impurity
Newstex Blogs 
International Business Times Australia
April 25, 2022 Monday 3:11 AM EST

 Copyright 2022 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 852 words
Body




Apr 25, 2022( International Business Times Australia: http://www.ibtimes.com.au/ Delivered by Newstex)  
 Pfizer is voluntarily recalling its blood pressure medication, Accupril, because of the presence of an impurity that may increase the risk of cancer if exposed to above acceptable daily intake (ADI) levels for a long time. 
Pfizer is recalling five lots of its Accupril (Quinapril HCl) tablets, which are used to lower blood pressure, because of the presence of the nitrosamineNnitroso-quinapril above the ADI. This was discovered during recent testing, announced the [1]company on U.S. Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) website. 
Impurities called nitrosamines are actually quite common in food and water, and even in vegetables and dairy products. In fact, according to the FDA[2], "everyone is exposed to some level of nitrosamines."However, if people are exposed to it at above the acceptable levels for a prolonged period of time, the impurity can increase therisk of cancer. 
"(B)ut a person taking a drug that contains nitrosamines at-or-below the acceptable daily intake limits every day for 70 years is not expected to have an increased risk of cancer,"noted the FDA. 
Pfizersaid[3]"there is no immediate risk"to the patients who are taking themedication. So far, it has not received any reports of adverse events related to therecalled[4]tablets. 
The recall affects five lots of Accupril tablets (Quinapril HCl Tablets) in 10 mg, 20 mg and 40 mg. They were distributed across the U.S. and also in Puerto Rico from December 2019 till this month. 
Consumers can find the NDC, Lot Number and Expiration Dates of the recalled products on both the FDA and Pfizer websites. Photos of the packaging are also available on the FDA website. 
Pfizer has alsorecalled[5]all lots of Accupril in Canada due to anitrosamine impurity[6]. 
Patients taking the product should consult with their healthcare provider or pharmacy to figure out if the product they have is affected. The FDA also stresses that those who are taking prescription medications with a possible nitrosamine impurity shouldnot stop taking their medications.Instead, they should talk to their health care provider about possible concerns ormedication alternatives. 
"Don't abruptly stop taking your prescription medications without first talking to your health care provider,"noted the FDA. "Your health care professional has a more complete picture of your health and health history and can help you make the best decisions for your care." 
The latest action camejust a month after Pfizer recalled certain lots of Accuretic[7], another hypertension medication, over similar impurity concerns. 
"Pfizer places the utmost emphasis on patient safety and product quality at every step in the manufacturing and supply chain process,"the company said at the time. "Pfizer has notified direct consignees by letter to arrange for the return of any recalled product." 

Photo: AFP / Don EMMERT 
 [ 1]: https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts/pfizer-voluntary-nationwide-recall-lots-accuprilr-quinapril-hcl-due-n-nitroso-quinapril-content [ 2]: https://www.fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-and-availability/information-about-nitrosamine-impurities-medications [ 3]: https://www.pfizer.com/news/press-release/press-release-detail/pfizer-voluntary-nationwide-recall-lots-accuprilr-quinapril [ 4]: https://www.ibtimes.com/ferrari-recall-more-2200-cars-china-over-brake-risk-3481806 [ 5]: https://recalls-rappels.canada.ca/en/alert-recall/pfizer-recalls-accupril-blood-pressure-tablets-due-nitrosamine-impurity [ 6]: https://www.fda.gov/consumers/consumer-updates/what-know-and-do-about-possible-nitrosamines-your-medication#:~:text=So%2C%20what%20are%20nitrosamines%3F,form%20in%20drugs%20during%20manufacturing. [ 7]: https://www.ibtimes.com/pfizer-recalls-blood-pressure-drug-over-impurity-concerns-3445631 
The views expressed in any and all content distributed by Newstex and its re-distributors (collectively, the "Newstex Authoritative Content") are solely those of the respective author(s) and not necessarily the views of Newstex or its re-distributors. Stories from such authors are provided "AS IS," with no warranties, and confer no rights. The material and information provided in Newstex Authoritative Content are for general information only and should not, in any respect, be relied on as professional advice. Newstex Authoritative Content is not "read and approved" before it is posted. Accordingly, neither Newstex nor its re-distributors make any claims, promises or guarantees about the accuracy, completeness, or adequacy of the information contained therein or linked to from such content, nor do they take responsibility for any aspect of such content. The Newstex Authoritative Content shall be construed as author-based content and commentary. Accordingly, no warranties or other guarantees are offered as to the quality of the opinions, commentary or anything else appearing in such Newstex Authoritative Content. Newstex and its re-distributors expressly reserve the right to delete stories at its and their sole discretion.
 Load-Date: April 25, 2022

 

End of Document


Alembic and Aurobindo issue US drug recalls, citing quality and production issues
FiercePharma Manufacturing
August 21, 2023

 Copyright 2023 Questex Media Group LLC All Rights Reserved
Section: ARTICLE
Length: 230 words
Byline: Joseph Keenan
Highlight: Alembic and Aurobindo Pharma, the U.S. unit of India's Aurobindo, issued voluntary recalls of products due to quality issues and manufacturing deficiencies, respectively.\r
Body




Alembic and Aurobindo Pharma, the U.S. unit of India's Aurobindo, issued voluntary recalls of products because of quality issues and manufacturing deficiencies, respectively.
Alembic&nbsp;recalled 82,400 bottles of the bacterial eye infection treatment tobramycin, according to an advisory posted on the FDA website. The nationwide recall kicked off July 27.
In its&nbsp;notice, the company said the action was taken due to “failed impurities/degradation specifications.”
As for Aurobindo, the company&nbsp;recalled a total of 96 bottles of rufinamide tablets for treating seizure disorders. The company's recall covers 48 bottles of&nbsp;400-mg dosages and 48 bottles of 200-mg&nbsp;dosages.
In both cases, the recalls were initiated due to the products being distributed throughout the U.S. without being approved.
The two recalls were issued by the company July 21.
The companies aren't strangers to manufacturing-related recalls and shortfalls.
Last October, Aurobindo&nbsp;pulled two batches of quinapril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets due to high nitrosamine levels. Quinapril and hydrochlorothiazide are a fixed-combination tablet used to lower blood pressure.&nbsp;
That same month, Alembic's site in Gujarat, India, was slapped with a Form 483&nbsp;from the FDA. The document listed four observations in the wake of a 10-day inspection. That facility produces oncology injectables.
 Load-Date: August 22, 2023

 

End of Document


Lupin skids as failed USFDA specifications lead to recalls of 2 drugs
The Economic Times
January 18, 2022 Tuesday

 Copyright 2022 Bennett Coleman & Co. Ltd. All Rights Reserved
Section: STOCK IN NEWS
Length: 271 words
Byline: Bhaskar Dutta
Body




NEW DELHI: Shares of Lupin shed 1.6 per cent in early trade Monday after the drug manufacturing major said that it is recalling 50,832 bottles of Gatifloxacin Ophthalmic Solution, an antibiotic used to treat bacterial infections of the eyes.As per the USFDA, the company's US-based unit is recalling the affected lot due to "failed stability specifications."The company's scrip fell to a low of Rs 937.15 as against Rs 951.80 at previous close on the National Stock Exchange.The affected lot has been manufactured at Lupin's Pithampur-based plant in Madhya Pradesh, PTI reported, adding that the lot had been distributed in the US by Baltimore-based Lupin Pharmaceuticals Inc.The drugmaker initiated Class III voluntary recall in the US and Puerto Rico on December 22 last year.A Class III recall is initiated in a "situation in which use of, or exposure to, a violative product is not likely to cause adverse health consequences."Lupin is also recalling 23,965 bottles of Oxycodone Hydrochloride tablets, used for the treatment of moderate to severe pain.As per the USFDA, the company is recalling the lot due to the "out-of-specification impurity test result observed at 18-month long term stability time point."The company's US-based subsidiary initiated Class III recall on December 29 last year.In July-September, Lupin reported a net loss of Rs 2,095 crore.During the quarter, the company booked a provision of Rs 1879.6 crore towards litigation and settlement related to diabetic drug Glumetza class actions as well as impairment expense of Rs 707.7 crore for specialty drug Solosec. 
For Reprint Rights: timescontent.com
 Load-Date: January 17, 2022

 

End of Document


Pharmalink Inc. And Recall Results, Inc. Announce Strategic Partnership To Enhance Drug Safety And Recall Efficiency
MENAFN - Press Releases (English)
April 26, 2024 Friday

 Copyright 2024 MENAFN.COM All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 819 words
Body




Link to Story
LARGO, FL ACCESSWIRE April 26, 2024 PharmaLink Inc., a national leader in pharmaceutical reverse distribution, and Recall Results, a prominent provider of comprehensive recall management and support services, today announced a strategic partnership aimed at enhancing drug safety and recall efficiency in the pharmaceutical industry.This groundbreaking collaboration leverages PharmaLink Inc.'s expertise in pharmaceutical returns processing and Recall Results' specialized knowledge and advanced technologies for managing complex recalls. Together, they introduce an innovative approach to ensure that the process of drug recalls, withdrawals, and market actions are more efficient, accurate, and responsive to public health needs.
The partnership will focus on developing integrated systems and technologies to streamline the recall process with the full ability to support recalls of any class all the way to the patient level. By combining PharmaLink's vast reverse logistics experience with Recall Results' sophisticated recall tracking capabilities, the two companies aim to significantly reduce the time it takes to identify and respond to potentially harmful pharmaceutical products that may exist in the marketplace.
"Through this partnership, PharmaLink offers comprehensive services for the notification, product retrieval, processing, storage, and disposal of recalled products from the healthcare supply chain. We could not be more excited about the launch of this strategic partnership and the solutions it brings to our clients," said Thierry Beckers, CEO of PharmaLink Inc. "This partnership with Recall Results represents a significant step towards enhancing the safety standards in our industry. Together, we are poised to make a substantial impact in protecting public health."
With a shared commitment to patient safety and compliance, this collaboration promises to deliver unmatched efficiency, accuracy, and responsiveness in addressing drug recalls. Together, PharmaLink and Recall Results are prepared to set new standards for recall management to enhance public health and consumer welfare.
"The collaboration with PharmaLink represents an exciting convergence of knowledge and capabilities," said John McFerron, President & CEO of Recall Results, "By integrating our sophisticated recall management solutions with PharmaLink's pharmaceutical returns expertise, we will realize our shared vision for a safer pharmaceutical environment. We are proud to be part of this initiative that promises to revolutionize drug safety standards."
The PharmaLink-Recall Results partnership is expected to set new benchmarks in drug safety and recall management. Further announcements regarding specific initiatives and programs will be made in the coming months.
Contact Information:
For PharmaLink, Inc.:
Andrew Chilkiewicz
Director, Marketing
(800) 257-3527
[email protected]
For Recall Results, Inc.:
Tom Brockhaus
SVP, Business Development & Client Services
888-263-6569
[email protected]
About PharmaLink Inc.: PharmaLink, Inc. is the nation's premier Pharmaceutical Reverse Distributor. With services spanning the complete spectrum of the pharmaceutical supply chain, we have a 360-degree view of the needs of all businesses involved in the delivery of healthcare. From a reverse logistics perspective, we deliver impactful solutions that trim cycle time while safely removing unwanted products from the marketplace. Our simple user interfaces are backed by a powerful enterprise infrastructure, producing accurate processing and quality analytics that optimize business decisions and increase bottom line. This is all achieved while adhering to stringent regulatory guidelines at the state and federal level. With customizable solutions available for any size client, PharmaLink is the choice provider for pharmaceutical return, recall, and disposal solutions.
About Recall Results, Inc.: Recall Results, Inc. is an industry-leading provider of innovative recall management solutions, dedicated to ensuring consumer safety and brand preservation. Our advanced recall technologies and expert teams streamline the entire recall process, minimizing disruption and maximizing compliance. From recall communications, notice design and implementation, to product recall call center, data management services and more, Recall Results offers comprehensive recall solutions for its clients. Through strategic expertise, transparency and accountability, we deliver tailored solutions that prioritize consumer welfare while safeguarding brand reputation. Businesses that partner with Recall Results rely on our unwavering commitment to excellence and proven track record of success in recall management across a variety of industries.
####
Contact Information
PharmaLink Marketing
[email protected]
18002573527
SOURCE: PharmaLink, Inc.
View the original press release on newswire.
MENAFN26042024004220003708ID1108143610
 Load-Date: July 15, 2024

 

End of Document


PharmaLink Inc. and Recall Results, Inc. Announce Strategic Partnership to Enhance Drug Safety and Recall Efficiency
ACCESSWIRE
April 26, 2024 Friday

 Copyright 2024 Filing Services Canada Inc. Provided by Syndigate Media Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 818 words
Body




LARGO, FL / ACCESSWIRE / April 26, 2024 / PharmaLink Inc., a national leader in pharmaceutical reverse distribution, and Recall Results, a prominent provider of comprehensive recall management and support services, today announced a strategic partnership aimed at enhancing drug safety and recall efficiency in the pharmaceutical industry.
This groundbreaking collaboration leverages PharmaLink Inc.'s expertise in pharmaceutical returns processing and Recall Results' specialized knowledge and advanced technologies for managing complex recalls. Together, they introduce an innovative approach to ensure that the process of drug recalls, withdrawals, and market actions are more efficient, accurate, and responsive to public health needs.
The partnership will focus on developing integrated systems and technologies to streamline the recall process with the full ability to support recalls of any class all the way to the patient level. By combining PharmaLink's vast reverse logistics experience with Recall Results' sophisticated recall tracking capabilities, the two companies aim to significantly reduce the time it takes to identify and respond to potentially harmful pharmaceutical products that may exist in the marketplace.
"Through this partnership, PharmaLink offers comprehensive services for the notification, product retrieval, processing, storage, and disposal of recalled products from the healthcare supply chain. We could not be more excited about the launch of this strategic partnership and the solutions it brings to our clients," said Thierry Beckers, CEO of PharmaLink Inc. "This partnership with Recall Results represents a significant step towards enhancing the safety standards in our industry. Together, we are poised to make a substantial impact in protecting public health."
With a shared commitment to patient safety and compliance, this collaboration promises to deliver unmatched efficiency, accuracy, and responsiveness in addressing drug recalls. Together, PharmaLink and Recall Results are prepared to set new standards for recall management to enhance public health and consumer welfare.
"The collaboration with PharmaLink represents an exciting convergence of knowledge and capabilities," said John McFerron, President & CEO of Recall Results, "By integrating our sophisticated recall management solutions with PharmaLink's pharmaceutical returns expertise, we will realize our shared vision for a safer pharmaceutical environment. We are proud to be part of this initiative that promises to revolutionize drug safety standards."
The PharmaLink-Recall Results partnership is expected to set new benchmarks in drug safety and recall management. Further announcements regarding specific initiatives and programs will be made in the coming months.
Contact Information:
For PharmaLink, Inc.:
Andrew Chilkiewicz
Director, Marketing
(800) 257-3527
achilkiewicz@pharmalinkinc.com
For Recall Results, Inc.:
Tom Brockhaus
SVP, Business Development & Client Services
888-263-6569
tbrockhaus@realtimeresults.net 
About PharmaLink Inc.: PharmaLink, Inc. is the nation's premier Pharmaceutical Reverse Distributor. With services spanning the complete spectrum of the pharmaceutical supply chain, we have a 360-degree view of the needs of all businesses involved in the delivery of healthcare. From a reverse logistics perspective, we deliver impactful solutions that trim cycle time while safely removing unwanted products from the marketplace. Our simple user interfaces are backed by a powerful enterprise infrastructure, producing accurate processing and quality analytics that optimize business decisions and increase bottom line. This is all achieved while adhering to stringent regulatory guidelines at the state and federal level. With customizable solutions available for any size client, PharmaLink is the choice provider for pharmaceutical return, recall, and disposal solutions.
About Recall Results, Inc.: Recall Results, Inc. is an industry-leading provider of innovative recall management solutions, dedicated to ensuring consumer safety and brand preservation. Our advanced recall technologies and expert teams streamline the entire recall process, minimizing disruption and maximizing compliance. From recall communications, notice design and implementation, to product recall call center, data management services and more, Recall Results offers comprehensive recall solutions for its clients. Through strategic expertise, transparency and accountability, we deliver tailored solutions that prioritize consumer welfare while safeguarding brand reputation. Businesses that partner with Recall Results rely on our unwavering commitment to excellence and proven track record of success in recall management across a variety of industries.
####
Contact Information
PharmaLink Marketing 
marketing@pharmalinkinc.com  
18002573527
SOURCE: PharmaLink, Inc.
View the original press release on newswire.com.
 Load-Date: April 26, 2024

 

End of Document


Widespread recalls affect popular diabetes drug
Tribune-Review (Greensburg, PA)
October 15, 2020 Thursday

 Copyright 2020 Tribune Review Publishing Company All Rights Reserved
Length: 457 words
Byline: by JACOB TIERNEY
Body




A common diabetes medication is in the midst of widespread national recalls after researchers found a contaminant that could potentially cause cancer, but local experts say there are plenty of alternative options available for those who take the drug. 
Metformin is used to control blood sugar levels in patients with Type 2 diabetes. It comes in two varieties: immediate release and extended release. 
The federal Food and Drug Administration found unsafe levels of nitrosodimethylamine in numerous extended-release metformin products. 
The substance, also known as NDMA, occurs naturally and can be found in food and drinking water, according to the FDA. However, at high doses, it can increase the risk of cancer. 
High levels of NDMA can contaminate medical products during manufacture, according to Dr. Esra Karslioglu French, Endocrine Medical Director for University of Pittsburgh Medical Center. 
The FDA began studying NDMA levels in several medications in 2019, turning its attention to metformin late that year. 
Numerous pharmaceutical companies have recalled their extended-release metformin products over the past several months. The most recent recalls were announced last week by the FDA. 
However, experts say people with diabetes have little reason to worry. 
"The first thing is that patients give their health care providers a call if they're uncomfortable or nervous or concerned," said Michele Axelson, lead diabetes educator with Excela Health. 
Metformin is one of the most common diabetes drugs, but most patients are prescribed the immediate-­release varieties, which don't have the high NDMA levels of the extended-release products, Axelson said. 
The extended-release products often are prescribed for patients who suffer gastro­intestinal side effects from immediate-release metformin, she said. 
Patients affected by the recalls should be able to switch to other diabetes medication without much trouble, she said. 
"There are many options in addition to metformin that are out on the market," she said. 
NDMA poses a cancer risk only when taken in large doses over a long period of time. Those taking extended-release metformin should continue to do so until receiving guidance from a doctor or pharmacist, French said. 
"Patients shouldn't stop their medications immediately, because that can create high levels of blood sugars and create an immediate danger to the patient," French said. 
Not all extended-release metformin products have been affected by the recall. "For the patients, the best way to deal with this situation is to check with the pharmacy to see if their medication has been recalled or not," French said. 
The FDA has published a list of all recalled products at fda.gov/drugs/drug-safety-­and-availability. 
 Load-Date: October 18, 2020

 

End of Document


Diabetes Drug Metformin Recalled by Multiple Manufacturers Over Carcinogens
Newsweek.com
July 8, 2020 Wednesday 8:20 PM EST

 Copyright © 2020 Newsweek Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 531 words
Byline: Scott McDonald
Highlight: Lupin Pharmaceuticals is the second company in three days to recall the drug, designed to improve blood glucose levels, because of high levels of impurities that can cause cancer.
Body




One manufacturer of a widely-used drug to help diabetics produce insulin and help control their blood sugar recalled that drug on Wednesday because it contained levels of carcinogens higher than recommended by the federal food and drug administration.
Lupin Pharmaceuticals Inc. voluntarily recalled all 500mg and 1,000mg batches of Metformin Hydrochloride Extended Release Tablets because they contain more carcinogens than recommended by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
Lupin is the second company in three days to recall the drug, designed to improve glucose levels in patients with Type 2 diabetes, because of its high levels of impurities that can cause cancer.
Lupin said in a statement that certain batches of the extended-release tablets tested were above the Acceptable Daily Intake Limit of the carcinogen N-Nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA).
"Out of an abundance of caution, the company is recalling all batches of Metformin Hydrochloride Extended-Release Tablets USP, 500mg and 1000mg in the US," the company stated. "To date, Lupin Pharmaceuticals Inc. has not received any reports of adverse events related to this recall."
NDMA is classified as an impurity that could possibly cause cancer, and it's a known environmental contaminant that's also found in water and foods, including meats, vegetables and dairy products.
These are the recalled bottles with their distribution dates:
•	500 mg bottles with NDC No. 68180-336-07 (11/05/2018 — 05/22/2020)500 mg bottles with NDC No. 68180-338-01 (11/21/2018 — 05/27/2020)1000 mg bottles with NDC No. 68180-337-07 (11/05/2018 — 05/22/2020)1000 mg bottles with NDC No. 68180-339-09 (11/21/2018 — 05/27/2020)
Lupin Pharmaceuticals said it will contact all vendors, wholesalers, distributors, drug chains, mail-order pharmacies and supermarkets to send the product back, or arrange for a return of the drug back to them.
Metformin Hydrochloride Extended Release Tablets are prescribed by doctors to help adults with Type 2 diabetes improve their blood glucose levels with the aid of exercise and diet.
The FDA advises that patients who are currently taking the drug to keep taking it until their doctors move them to an alternative treatment.
"It could be dangerous for patients with this serious condition to stop taking their metformin without first talking to their health care professionals," the FDA stated.
Lupin isn't the only company to recall Metformin this week, and they're the sixth company in all to do it. On Monday, Granules Pharmaceuticals recalled 12 different 750mg batches of Metformin Hydrochloride Extended Release Tablets, just because one batch of it tested positive for NDMA levels higher than allowed by the FDA.
Walmart is one of the big box retailers that carry the Granules Metformin, and Walmart issued the recall on its website this week, according to the Miami Herald. Among those recalls (all 100-count bottles) are:
•	No. 4920003A (Exp. May 2021)No. 4920004A and No. 4920005A (Exp. June 2021)No. 4920009A (Exp. Nov 2021)No. 4920010A (Exp. May 2022)No. 4920011A and 224920012A (Exp. June 2022)No. 4920013A and 4920014A (Exp. July 2022)No. 4920015A (Exp. August 2022)No. 4920016A (Exp. January 2023)
Link to Image
 Graphic



 
Metformin
Francis Dean/Corbis/Getty
500mh Metformin tablets.
 Load-Date: July 8, 2020

 

End of Document


Teligent's Post-Sale Drug Recall Puts Its Ch. 11 Plan In Doubt
Law360 Legal News - Corporate
June 17, 2022 Friday

 Copyright 2022 Portfolio Media, Inc. All Rights Reserved
 
Section: BANKRUPTCY, DELAWARE, HEALTH, LIFE SCIENCES, NEW JERSEY
Length: 868 words
Byline: Leslie A. Pappas
Highlight: The Chapter 11 plan for the generic-drug maker once known as Teligent Inc. was thrown into doubt Friday after a bankruptcy court ruled that the company owes a refund for drugs it sold after bankruptcy and then later recalled as part of an asset sale.  
Body




The Chapter 11 plan for the generic-drug maker once known as Teligent Inc. was thrown into doubt Friday after a bankruptcy court ruled that the company owes a refund for drugs it sold after bankruptcy and then later recalled as part of an asset sale.  

 Drug distributor KeySource Acquisition LLC bought the pharmaceuticals with the expectation that it would be able to sell them up until the time they expired, and there was not enough evidence to show that Teligent, now known as VJGJ Inc., had sold the products on an "as is" basis, U.S. Bankruptcy Judge Brendan L. Shannon of the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware said.

 "I'm satisfied that there was in fact a breach of a warranty in a post-petition sale," Judge Shannon said at the end of a five-hour evidentiary hearing held virtually.

 The ruling came as VJGJ sought confirmation of its Chapter 11 plan, which in April was cleared to be sent to creditors for a vote.

 The claims from KeySource, McKesson Corp. and other drug distributors have the potential to upend the plan, one of VJGJ's attorneys, Matthew B. Lunn of Young Conaway Stargatt & Taylor LLP, told the court at the beginning of the hearing.

 "We may be in conversion land, we may not," he said. "It all depends how we do with the McKesson and KeySource claims."

 The claims that KeySource and McKesson raised Friday were linked to a recall of drugs that occurred after PAI Holdings LLC bought Teligent's new drug assets for $14.42 million in a bankruptcy auction in January. As part of the sale, Teligent agreed to perform a voluntary recall of all drugs in the market at the distributor level and retail level.

 Iselin, New Jersey-based Teligent sought Chapter 11 protection in October 2021 with nearly $130 million in debt.

 McKesson was among the pharmaceutical distributors that pushed for assurances early in the bankruptcy that Teligent would continue to honor existing customer programs and do business with them as usual.

 The hearing Friday focused on whether the pharmaceutical distributors' claims would be classified as "administrative claims" under the bankruptcy code and therefore would be paid ahead of other claims.

 The company's Chapter 11 plan hinges on a settlement with lender Ares Capital Corp. that provides a $3.025 million pool of cash earmarked for unsecured creditors and a reserve of $2 million to fund administrative claims and the wind-down of the estates, Lunn said. "The plan says that there's no additional money from Ares for expense claims other than what is included in the supplemental budget," Lunn told the court.

 Jennifer Feldsher of Morgan Lewis & Bockius LLP, an attorney for Ares, told the court Friday that it hadn't agreed to pay additional expenses that weren't budgeted.

 "This was the deal. The deal was that there are two pots being left behind, and they are finite amounts," she said.

 KeySource, a generic drug distributor, claimed that Teligent owed $237,446.40 for drugs that it bought from Teligent after the bankruptcy petition was filed and were recalled in March 2022 after the PAI sale.

 McKesson, an Irving, Texas-based health care company that distributed five of Teligent's generic drugs to pharmacies and health care providers, claimed it was owed at least $340,372 to administer the recall of the drugs. McKesson argued that it was up to the debtor to pay for the costs of the recall.

 And in a filing just before the hearing, Walgreen Co. claimed the debtor owed no less than $927,089 for costs stemming from the post-petition recall.

 Lunn called Walgreens' motion a "me too" motion that was part of the "dogpile" of filings that came in right before the confirmation hearing.

 Judge Shannon, commenting that it had been a while since he'd heard the word "dogpile" in court, said he would not comment on the Walgreens motion because he had not had a chance to read it.

 The judge denied McKesson's motion because unlike KeySource, McKesson bought the drugs before Teligent declared bankruptcy.

 The debtors' confirmation hearing was postponed for the end of the month.

 KeySource Acquisition LLC was represented by Thomas G. Macauley of Macauley LLC.

 McKesson Corp. was represented by Jeffrey K. Garfinkle and Rebecca Wicks of Buchalter and Jason C. Powell of The Powell Firm LLC.

 Walgreen Company was represented by Schuyler G. Carroll of Loeb & Loeb LLP and Jonathan M. Stemerman of Armstrong Teasdale LLP.

 Ares Capital Corporation was represented by Jennifer Feldsher and T. Charlie Liu of Morgan Lewis & Bockius LLP and Robert J. Dehney, Matthew B. Harvey, and S. Christopher Cundra IV of Morris Nichols Arsht & Tunnell LLP.

 VJGJ Inc. and the debtors are represented by Michael R. Nestor, Matthew B. Lunn, Shane M. Reil, and S. Alexander Faris of Young Conaway Stargatt & Taylor LLP, Catherine L. Steege, Melissa M. Root and Landon S. Raiford of Jenner & Block LLP and Mark Minuti, Lucian B. Murley, and Monique B. DiSabatino of Saul Ewing Arnstein & Lehr LLP.

 The case is In re: VJGJ Inc., case number 1:21-bk-11332, in the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware.

 --Additional reporting by Vince Sullivan, Rick Archer and Jeff Montgomery. Editing by Alex Hubbard.
Link to PDF
Link to PDF
Link to PDF
Link to PDF
 Load-Date: July 1, 2022

 

End of Document


Thyroid Medication Recall 2021: Drug Called Back Over Low-Potency Risk In Hypothyroidism Treatment
Newstex Blogs 
International Business Times News
May 3, 2021 Monday 5:50 PM EST

 Copyright 2021 Newstex LLC All Rights Reserved
Length: 552 words
Body




May 03, 2021( International Business Times News: http://www.ibtimes.com Delivered by Newstex) ; Acella Pharmaceuticals[1]has recalled for the third time a significant number of thyroid tablets because they may not be potent enough.Acella first recalled several lots of its thyroid medication back in September 2020 because of a sub-potency issue and then again in late May 2020 because the medication was over potent, the Miami[2] Herald[3]noted.In this recall, Acella has called back 35 lots of thyroid tablets that are under potent after it received 43 reports of 'serious adverse events,' according to the notice posted by the Food and Drug Administration.Patients that take thyroid tablets may have hypothyroidism, an underactive thyroid. If they take the recalled thyroid tablets that are not potent enough, they may experience signs of hypothyroidism such as fatigue, increased sensitivity to cold, constipation, dry skin, puffy face, hair loss, slow heart rate, depression, swelling of the thyroid gland or unexplained weight gain or difficulty losing weight.There is also a risk of early miscarriage, fetal hyperthyroidism, and impairments to fetal neural and skeletal development in newborns and pregnant women taking the drug. Those that are elderly and those with underlying cardiac disease may develop cardiac pain, palpitations, or cardiac arrhythmia.Patients who have the affected medication in their possession should not stop taking it as the risk of discontinuing the drug without talking to a medical provider first could be greater than immediately stopping its intake, Acella said.The medication being recalled was sold in 15, 30, 60, 90, and 120 mg doses, and according to the FDA recall notice may contain less than 90% of the labeled about of ingredient liothyronine and/or levothyroxine.The thyroid tablets were sold in 100- and 7-count bottles. 
A full list of lots recalled can be viewed here[4]. The list includes the NDC number, product description, and lot number, as well as the expiration date of the affected thyroid tablets from Acella. Images of the recalled medication can be viewed here[5].The recalled medication was distributed nationwide to wholesalers, pharmacies, and healthcare offices, as well as Acella's direct accounts.Questions about the recall can be directed to Acella Pharmaceuticals at 1-888-424-4341, Monday through Friday from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. ET or by email at recall@acellapharma.com [6].;Patients that have any problems from taking the recalled medication should contact their healthcare provider. Pictured: Representative image of pills from a bottle. Photo: Pixabay [ 1]: https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts/acella-pharmaceuticals-llc-issues-voluntary-nationwide-recall-certain-lots-np-thyroidr-thyroid-0 [ 2]: https://www.miamiherald.com/news/health-care/article251108814.html [ 3]: http://www.miamiherald.com/news/health-care/article251108814.html [ 4]: https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts/acella-pharmaceuticals-llc-issues-voluntary-nationwide-recall-certain-lots-np-thyroidr-thyroid-0 [ 5]: https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts/acella-pharmaceuticals-llc-issues-voluntary-nationwide-recall-certain-lots-np-thyroidr-thyroid-0 [ 6]: recall@acellapharma.com  
 Load-Date: May 3, 2021

 

End of Document


Pfizer's smoking cessation drug recalled by Health Department
CE Noticias Financieras English
September 24, 2021 Friday

 Copyright 2021 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2021 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved
Length: 215 words
Body




The Spanish Agency for Medicines and Health Products (Aemps), under the Ministry of Health, has reported on Friday the preventive withdrawal of new batches of Champix, a drug to quit smoking of which some lots had already been withdrawn after its marketer (Pfizer) stopped distribution to investigate the presence of an impurity in the drug.
The evaluation conducted at European level has concluded that the acceptable limit of this impurity present in the drug is lower than initially established, which leads to update the measures established in July, as reported in a statement the Aemps, collects Efe.
The Agency stresses that there is no immediate risk to patients treated with this drug and recommends that people in treatment to go to your doctor to assess the change to another drug.
The Champix batches were already recalled in July. The batches affected by the recall are all those that can currently be found in wholesale warehouses and pharmacies.
"Since the company has not provided a new reinstatement date, no new treatments should be initiated until the drug is available on the market again," the agency said.
Alternative treatments for nicotine dependence should be considered instead. The agency says it will update information on the supply problem as soon as it is resolved.
 Load-Date: September 25, 2021

 

End of Document


Family Dollar recalls over-the-counter drugs in Utah, 22 other states
The Deseret News
October 11, 2023 Wednesday

 Copyright 2023 The Deseret News Publishing Co.  All Rights Reserved
Section: RETAIL INDUSTRY NEWS
Length: 458 words
Byline: Krysyan Edler
Body




Family Dollar issued a voluntary recall of several over-the-counter drugs and medical devices sold in stores across the country, including Utah.
On Thursday, the company said the products were stored outside of the required temperatures included on the products' labels and were then distributed to various Family Dollar stores, according to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
Family Dollar has not received reports of illnesses or consumer complaints in regards to the recalled products but is conducting the recall "out of an abundance of caution," the FDA said.
What products were recalled?
In its recall announcement, the FDA included an eight-page list of recalled products. The list includes the products' description and SKU number.
Some of the products include toothpaste, cold and flu medicine, pregnancy tests, sleep aids and pain relievers. Affected brands include Crest, Colgate, NyQuil, Tylenol, Advil and Swan.
The products were sold in stores between June 1 and Oct. 4.
In what states were the recalled products sold?
The FDA did not specify which recalled products were sold in which state, but the recall affects the following 23 states: 
•	Alabama.
•	Arkansas.
•	Arizona.
•	California. 
•	Colorado. 
•	Florida. 
•	Georgia.
•	Idaho. 
•	Kansas.
•	Louisiana.
•	Mississippi.
•	Montana.
•	North Dakota.
•	Nebraska.
•	New Mexico.
•	Nevada.
•	Oklahoma.
•	Oregon.
•	South Dakota.
•	Texas.
•	Utah. 
•	Washington. 
•	Wyoming.
What Utah Family Dollar stores sold the recalled products?
Family Dollar has almost 60 stores in over 50 Utah cities, according to Family Dollar. In its recall announcement, the FDA did not specify which Family Dollar locations sold the recalled products. 
The best way to determine if you purchased a recalled product would be to refer to the products and corresponding SKU numbers, on the list of recalled products.
What to do with recalled products
The FDA recommends consumers stop using the recalled products. Consumers can return products to their local Family Dollar with or without a receipt.
Why does medicine have to be stored at certain temperatures?
Medications should be stored at the temperatures listed on their product label. Storing medicine at an improper temperature can "potentially lead to loss of potency or even reduce the effectiveness of the medication," according to Ohio State University's Wexner Medical Center. 
This applies to both prescription and over-the-counter medications, but most over-the-counter "products are dosage forms that are less likely to be impacted by temperatures," the center said.
Humidity can affect medications, too. Amanda Savage, an assistant professor at the UNC Eshelman School of Pharmacy, told Today.com that consumers should avoid storing medications in their bathrooms due to temperatures and humidity fluctuating.
 Load-Date: October 11, 2023

 

End of Document


Popular anxiety drug recalled over potentially ‘life-threatening’ issue
WebNews - English
MSN South Africa
https://www.msn.com/en-za/news/other/popular-anxiety-drug-recalled-over-potentially-life-threatening-issue/ar-AA1uAXtr November 23, 2024 Saturday


Length: 437 words
Body



The US Food and Drug Administration has recalled the anti-anxiety drug Clonazepam due to a potentially "life-threatening " labeling issue, according to the agency. The FDA said in a statement that Endo Inc., a pharmaceutical provider, issued...

 

End of Document


HIGH CARCINOGEN LEVELS CAUSE MORE DRUG RECALLS
States News Service
January 8, 2020 Wednesday

 Copyright 2020 States News Service
Length: 416 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: ROCKVILLE, MD 
Body




The following information was released by the Regulatory Affairs Professionals Society:
By Zachary Brennan
The series of recalls of ranitidine (also known as Zantac) and nizatidine products grew longer with three US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) announcements on Tuesday and Wednesday.
The 150 mg and 300 mg versions of the stomach acid treatment from New Jersey-based generic drugmaker Appco Pharma are being recalled. In addition, Denton Pharma and Northwind Pharmaceuticals also recalled all unexpired lots of ranitidine tablets, 150 mg and 300mg versions. Mylan on Wednesday also recalled three lots of the ulcer treatment nizatidine (including the 150mg and 300mg strengths).
All of the recalls are due to higher-than-acceptable levels of N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), which is classified as a probable human carcinogen. To date, Appco has not received any adverse event reports related to use of the product. Northwind said in its recall that it has ceased distribution of its ranitidine products in the US while the manufacturer continues its efforts to test and investigate in cooperation with the FDA.
FDA previously announced the voluntary recall of over-the-counter (OTC) ranitidine tablets (75 mg and 150 mg), labeled by Walgreens, Walmart and Rite-Aid and manufactured by Apotex Corp. Similarly, Sandoz announced a voluntary recall of 14 lots of prescription ranitidine capsules.
Although many of these levels of NDMA observed through FDA testing are much lower than the levels some third-party scientists first claimed, some levels still exceed what the FDA considers acceptable for these medicines, Janet Woodcock, director of FDAs Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, said in November, explaining the impurity levels the agency found.
Ranitidine products from Sandoz, Aurobindo and Dr Reddy's, for instance, were found to exceed the acceptable daily intake limit for NDMA, while ranitidine products from Strides Shasun and Watson did not, according to FDAs analysis. Similar recalls have occurred in the UK too.
By 26 April, the European Medicines Agency is calling on companies to conduct a risk evaluation to identify products at risk of N-nitrosamine formation or (cross-)contamination and report the outcome and fill out either the template indicating no risk identified or risk identified.
FDA previously said some of the NDMA levels in the ranitidine medicines are similar to the levels you would expect to be exposed to if you ate common foods like grilled or smoked meats.
 Load-Date: January 9, 2020

 

End of Document


Cancer fears spur recall of weight-loss drug
Edmonton Sun
February 16, 2020 Sunday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2020 Edmonton Sun All Rights Reserved
Section: LIFE; Pg. A44
Length: 235 words
Body




Weight-loss drug Belviq will be withdrawn from the U.S. market at the request of the Food and Drug Administration, after research tied it to increased rates of cancer.
Belviq came on the market in the U.S. in 2012 and is sold by Japanese drugmaker Eisai Co. U.S. sales of the drug peaked in 2015, with more than 600,000 prescriptions filled that year in the U.S., according to data compiled by Bloomberg and Symphony Health. Eisai's revenue from the drug in the Americas in fiscal 2014 was $49.4 million, according to data compiled by Bloomberg. The pill is thought to trigger chemical signals that make people want to eat less. But early studies, done in rats, gave hints that it might also cause cancer. Since Belviq was approved, researchers have been conducting a five-yearlong study to look at the drug's safety profile.
The FDA said Thursday that those higher risks were significant enough for the agency to take the rare step of calling for the drug's removal. About 7.7% of Belviq patients had cancer diagnoses, compared with 7.1% of patients who got a placebo. Individuals taking Belviq were diagnosed more frequently with some types of tumors, including pancreatic, colorectal and lung cancers, the FDA said. Eisai said in a statement that it believes Belviq's benefits for overweight and obese patients outweigh the drug's risks.
- Bloomberg !@COPYRIGHT=© 2020 Sun Media Corporation. All rights reserved.
 Load-Date: February 16, 2020

 

End of Document


Cancer fears spur recall of weight-loss drug
Calgary Sun
February 16, 2020 Sunday
Final Edition

 Copyright 2020 Calgary Sun All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Pg. A47
Length: 235 words
Body




Weight-loss drug Belviq will be withdrawn from the U.S. market at the request of the Food and Drug Administration, after research tied it to increased rates of cancer.
Belviq came on the market in the U.S. in 2012 and is sold by Japanese drugmaker Eisai Co. U.S. sales of the drug peaked in 2015, with more than 600,000 prescriptions filled that year in the U.S., according to data compiled by Bloomberg and Symphony Health. Eisai's revenue from the drug in the Americas in fiscal 2014 was $49.4 million, according to data compiled by Bloomberg.
The pill is thought to trigger chemical signals that make people want to eat less. But early studies, done in rats, gave hints that it might also cause cancer. Since Belviq was approved, researchers have been conducting a five-yearlong study to look at the drug's safety profile.
The FDA said Thursday that those higher risks were significant enough for the agency to take the rare step of calling for the drug's removal. About 7.7% of Belviq patients had cancer diagnoses, compared with 7.1% of patients who got a placebo. Individuals taking Belviq were diagnosed more frequently with some types of tumors, including pancreatic, colorectal and lung cancers, the FDA said.
Eisai said in a statement that it believes Belviq's benefits for overweight and obese patients outweigh the drug's risks.
- Bloomberg !@COPYRIGHT=© 2020 Sun Media Corporation. All rights reserved.
 Load-Date: February 16, 2020

 

End of Document


Erectile dysfunction and depression drugs recalled after factory ‘mix up’
The Independent (United Kingdom)
December 10, 2020 Thursday 9:25 PM GMT

 Copyright 2020 Independent Digital News and Media Limited All Rights Reserved
 
Section: NEWS,WORLD,AMERICAS; Version:1
Length: 255 words
Byline: Matt Mathers
Highlight: Mix up was a result of third-party error, says drug-maker
Body




A Tennessee -based pharmaceutical company  is recalling two drugs that got "mixed up" while being packaged in a factory. 
AvKARE said on Wednesday its 100mg Sidenafil and 100mg Trazodone tablets were put in the same bottles due to a "third party" error.
Sidenafil is the main ingredient in Viagra, a medication used to treat erectile dysfunction , while Trazodone is used to treat depression. 
Sidenafil may pose serious health risks to consumers with underlying medical issues and others who are not supposed to take it, AvKARE said in a statment.
Trazodone may result in adverse health consequences such as sedation, dizziness, constipation, and blurred vision, the company added.
AvKARE said it had not yet recieved any reports of people getting sick as a result of taking the wrong medication.
In a statement published on the US Food and Drug Administration's website, the company said it is recalling one batch of both products. 
Those affected are Sildenafil 100 mg tablet lot 36884 with an expiration date of 03/2022, and Trazodone Hydrochloride 100 mg tablet lot 36783 with an expiration date of 06/2022.
AvKARE said the drugs were "distributed to our distributors and wholesalers, and then further distributed nationwide".
The company “notified its distributors and customers and is arranging for return of all recalled product of the listed lots”.
Anyone who has an adverse reaction to taking either drug by mistake is being asked to contact the FDA's MedWatch Adverse Event Reporting program either online, by regular mail or by fax.
 Load-Date: December 10, 2020

 

End of Document


Pfizer Further Expands Recall Of Anti-smoking Drug Chantix
dpa-AFX International ProFeed
September 17, 2021 Friday 3:42 PM GMT

 Copyright 2021 dpa-AFX Wirtschaftsnachrichten GmbH All Rights Reserved
 
Length: 427 words
Body




       NEW YORK CITY (dpa-AFX) - Drug major Pfizer has again expanded the earlier two recalls of its anti-smoking Drug Chantix (Varenicline) in the form of tablets, to now include all the lots, for the potential presence of nitrosamine impurity, N-Nitroso-varenicline, at or above the FDA interim acceptable intake limit (ADI), the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or FDA said in a statement.  In July, Pfizer had initially recalled two lots of Chantix 0.5mg tablets, two lots of Chantix 1 mg tablets, and eight lots of a Chantix kit of 0.5mg/1 mg tablets for the similar nitrosamine impurity issue. Later in August, it expanded the recall to include additional four lots of Chantix kit 0.5mg/1 mg tablets.  The current recall involves all (156) lots of Chantix 0.5 mg and 1 mg tablets. Pfizer said it is undertaking this precautionary measure as alternative suppliers have been approved in the U.S.  The agency noted that though there is no immediate risk to patients taking this medication, but long-term ingestion of N-nitroso-varenicline may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans.  The health benefits of stopping smoking outweigh the theoretical potential cancer risk from the nitrosamine impurity in varenicline, it added.  The company is yet to receive any reports of adverse events assessed to be related to this recall.  Chantix is indicated to help patients quit smoking and is intended for short term use. The drug has a safety profile that has been established over 15 years of marketing authorization and through a robust clinical program.   The affected products are packed in bottles of 56 tablets and cartons containing 4 blister packs of 14 tablets each as well as cartons containing one blister pack of 11 0.5 mg tablets and one blister pack containing 42 1 mg tablets.  T*hey were distributed to wholesalers and distributors across the U.S., US Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico from May 2019 to September 2021. The expiration dates range from August 2021 to December 2023.  The company has urged patients currently taking Chantix to consult with their healthcare provider about alternative treatment options. It has also asked wholesalers and distributors with an existing inventory of Chantix tablets to stop use and distribution and quarantine the product immediately.   Nitrosamine, a known environmental contaminant, is classified as a probable human carcinogen that could cause cancer. This is generally found in water and foods, including cured and grilled meats, dairy products, and vegetables.      
 Load-Date: September 17, 2021

 

End of Document


Pfizer Recalls Some Blood Pressure Drugs, Citing Cancer Risk
The New York Times 
March 23, 2022 Wednesday 22:43 EST

 Copyright 2022 The New York Times Company All Rights Reserved
Section: HEALTH
Length: 508 words
Byline: Christina Jewett
Highlight: The move follows recalls of other medications found to have higher levels of potential carcinogens.
Body




The move follows recalls of other medications found to have higher levels of potential carcinogens.
Pfizer is recalling some shipments of its blood pressure drug Accuretic, as well as authorized generic versions of the medication, saying that a cancer-causing compound in those lots exceeded the acceptable daily intake level.
The compound in the medication is nitrosamine, which is also found in water and beer as well as some foods including bacon and grilled meats. It is believed to pose a small risk of cancer in patients taking the drugs for an extended time.
Such recalls have become common in recent years as private labs and companies have detected cancer-causing impurities and set off wide recalls, especially in blood pressure drugs. In September 2020, the Food and Drug Administration urged companies to look for these compounds on a regular basis. The agency announced another nitrosamine-related recall on Wednesday for a Sandoz drug meant to reduce discomfort related to painful musculoskeletal conditions.
In 2018, the F.D.A. announced a recall of medications that contain valsartan after NDMA, a probable carcinogen, was discovered in them.
A wave of recalls ensued after Valisure, then a pharmacy company that regularly tests medications for impurities, indicated the presence of nitrosamine in ranitidine, an ingredient in the heartburn drug Zantac. Valisure petitioned the F.D.A. to broaden testing after ranitidine was found to have a type of nitrosamine called N-nitrosodimethylamine, or NDMA, which is considered a probable carcinogen.
Drugs such as metformin, for people with diabetes, and Chantix, for those trying to quit smoking, have also faced recalls related to probable carcinogens.
Accuretic has relatively few users: About 1,300 people took it in 2020. Its generic formulation has more, about 192,000 users, according to data from IQVIA, an analytics company. The generic drug comprises the ingredients quinapril and hydrochlorothiazide and generated about $4.7 million in sales in 2020, IQVIA data show.
Pfizer said in a news release that it was not aware of any adverse events related to the Accuretic recall. It said the benefits of taking the drug outweighed the risks, adding that the drug lowered blood pressure and reduced the risk of strokes and heart attacks. The company advised patients to talk to their doctors about alternative treatment options.
On Wednesday, David Light, a founder of Valisure, said: “We’re now over three years after the initial discoveries of nitrosamine impurities in major medications and continuing to see the ripple effects grow.”
He also noted that his team had discovered benzene, a known carcinogen, in consumer products including sunscreen and body sprays and that the F.D.A. even more quickly began asking industry to broaden its own benzene testing.
PHOTO: Pfizer’s drug for high blood pressure, marketed under the name Accuretic, was recalled because of higher-than-acceptable levels of nitrosamine, a carcinogen. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Mark Lennihan/Associated Press FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 Load-Date: March 23, 2022

 

End of Document


Some tianeptine products recalled as CDC links drug to 'cluster of severe illness'
CNN Wire
February 1, 2024 Thursday 8:51 PM GMT

 Copyright 2024 Cable News Network All Rights Reserved
Length: 673 words
Byline: By Amanda Musa, CNN
Dateline: (CNN) 
Body




             (CNN) - The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is linking a "cluster of severe illness" to products with the unapproved drug tianeptine, also known as "gas station heroin," that could also contain synthetic cannabis.
Neptune Resources,which makes some tianeptine products, has issued a nationwide recall, according to an announcement posted this week.
The company, which says its products have not been linked to any reports of adverse events,is sending letters to all distributors and customers and is arranging for the return of recalled products, including all lots of Neptune's Fix Elixir, Neptune's Fix Extra Strength Elixir and Neptune's Fix Tablets.
"The products are being recalled because they contain tianeptine, an ingredient that is not FDA-approved for any medical use," Neptune Resources said in the statement. "The presence of tianeptine renders the products unapproved drugs for which safety and efficacy have not been established and, therefore, are subject to recall."
Tianeptine is an antidepressant prescribed in Europe, Asia and Latin America to treat major depressive disorder, according to the US Food and Drug Administration.
In the United States, tianeptine products are often sold illegally online and at gas stations as dietary supplements purported to improve brain function and treat conditions including anxiety, depression, pain and opioid use disorder, the FDA says.
Products that contain tianeptine are sold under several brand names, including Pegasus and Zaza, the CDC says.
The FDA has issued a warning urging consumers not to purchase or use tianeptine products due to serious risks including seizures, loss of consciousness and death.
In recent years, at least two deaths related to tianeptine products marketed as dietary supplements have been reported to the FDA, data shows.
"Neptune Resources LLC's distribution channels have not reported any adverse events from the use of its products," the company says.
According to a report published Thursday by the CDC, Neptune's Fix was the most commonly used product among tianeptine exposures reported to the New Jersey Poison Control Center during the second half of 2023.
Between June and November, the center received 20 exposure calls from health care facilities regarding tianeptine use in 17 people, an "uncharacteristic spike" from the center's average of two or fewer cases per year.
Of the 17 cases, 13 were admitted to intensive care units, and seven required intubation, the report says. No deaths were reported.
"All patients were described as having altered mental status upon evaluation," the report says.
Other reported complications related to unregulated tianeptine products included low blood pressure, seizure and heart rhythm irregularities such as tachycardia, according to the report. At least one person went into cardiac arrest.
Nine people said they had used tianeptine previously; six ingested tianeptine along with other substances, including alprazolam, kratom, tramadol, trazodone and gabapentin.
Fourteen patients reported ingesting Neptune's Fix, which contains tianeptine and kavain, a chemical compound in the kava plant used to promote relaxation.
Additionally, the researchers say that an analysis of at least two of the bottles of Neptune's Fix found that they contained synthetic cannabinoid receptor agonists - synthetic weed - which wasn't listed on the labels.
Synthetic cannabinoids are human-made mind-altering chemicals that are similar to the chemicals found in marijuana, but they can cause serious side effects that are different from those of marijuana.
Health care providers and consumers are urged to report adverse events or side effects related to tianeptine to the FDA's MedWatch Safety Information and Adverse Event Reporting Program.
Anyone who has questions about tianeptine or needs emergency assistance can contact Poison Help at 1-800-222-1222 or PoisonHelp.org.         
             By Amanda Musa, CNN         
TM & © 2024 Cable News Network, Inc., a Time Warner Company. All rights reserved.
 Load-Date: February 1, 2024

 

End of Document


Cancer concerns lead to 'precautionary' recall of anti-smoking drug
CBS - 12 WJTV (Jackson, Mississippi)
September 17, 2021 Friday

 Copyright 2021 Media General Communications Holdings, LLC
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: LIVING LOCAL
Length: 277 words
Byline: Kaitlyn Hall, NEXSTAR MEDIA WIRE
Body




(WTAJ) — A popular drug to curb smoking habits is being recalled over consumer safety concerns.
Pfizer has announced a voluntary recall of all batches of Chantix 0.5 mg and 1 mg tablets due to the presence of an amount of nitrosamine above the Food and Drug Administration's acceptable limit.
 The recall comes two months after Pfizer paused the distribution of the drug in July and pulled nine lots from production and shelves. Pfizer has notified wholesalers and distributors with an existing inventory to stop distribution and production immediately.
 Chantix was approved by the FDA in 2006 as a prescription medication used to help adults quit smoking. The drug is commonly used for 12 to 24 weeks.
 There is no immediate risk to patients currently taking Chantix, according to a company statement posted on the FDA website. However, patients taking the medication should consult with their health care provider to determine if alternative treatments are available.
 The affected lots were sent to distributors and wholesalers nationwide from May 2019 to September 2021.
 According to the FDA, N-Nitroso-varenicline is in the nitrosamine class of compounds, some of which are considered probably human carcinogens (substances that could cause cancer), based on laboratory tests.
 "Pfizer is undertaking this precautionary measure," the company said in its statement. "Long-term ingestion of N-nitroso-varenicline may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans."
 According to Pfizer, patients with Chantix Tablets should contact Stericycle Inc. at 888-276-6166 (Mon.-Fri. 8:00 am – 5:00 pm ET) for return and reimbursement information.
 Graphic



 
In this June 11, 2009 file photo, a customer at the Red Key Taven in Indianapolis lights a cigarette. (AP Photo/Darron Cummings, file)
 Load-Date: September 18, 2021

 

End of Document


Cancer concerns lead to 'precautionary' recall of anti-smoking drug
CBS - 11 WJHL (Johnson City, Tennessee)
September 19, 2021 Sunday

 Copyright 2021 Media General Communications Holdings, LLC
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 277 words
Byline: Kaitlyn Hall
Body




(WTAJ) — A popular drug to curb smoking habits is being recalled over consumer safety concerns.
Pfizer has announced a voluntary recall of all batches of Chantix 0.5 mg and 1 mg tablets due to the presence of an amount of nitrosamine above the Food and Drug Administration's acceptable limit.
 The recall comes two months after Pfizer paused the distribution of the drug in July and pulled nine lots from production and shelves. Pfizer has notified wholesalers and distributors with an existing inventory to stop distribution and production immediately.
 Chantix was approved by the FDA in 2006 as a prescription medication used to help adults quit smoking. The drug is commonly used for 12 to 24 weeks.
 There is no immediate risk to patients currently taking Chantix, according to a company statement posted on the FDA website. However, patients taking the medication should consult with their health care provider to determine if alternative treatments are available.
 The affected lots were sent to distributors and wholesalers nationwide from May 2019 to September 2021.
 According to the FDA, N-Nitroso-varenicline is in the nitrosamine class of compounds, some of which are considered probably human carcinogens (substances that could cause cancer), based on laboratory tests.
 "Pfizer is undertaking this precautionary measure," the company said in its statement. "Long-term ingestion of N-nitroso-varenicline may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans."
 According to Pfizer, patients with Chantix Tablets should contact Stericycle Inc. at 888-276-6166 (Mon.-Fri. 8:00 am - 5:00 pm ET) for return and reimbursement information.
 Load-Date: September 20, 2021

 

End of Document


Cancer concerns lead to 'precautionary' recall of anti-smoking drug
FOX - 2 KTVI (St. Louis)
September 17, 2021 Friday

 Copyright 2021 Local TV LLC
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NATIONAL
Length: 277 words
Byline: Kaitlyn Hall
Body




(WTAJ) — A popular drug to curb smoking habits is being recalled over consumer safety concerns.
Pfizer has announced a voluntary recall of all batches of Chantix 0.5 mg and 1 mg tablets due to the presence of an amount of nitrosamine above the Food and Drug Administration's acceptable limit.
 The recall comes two months after Pfizer paused the distribution of the drug in July and pulled nine lots from production and shelves. Pfizer has notified wholesalers and distributors with an existing inventory to stop distribution and production immediately.
 Chantix was approved by the FDA in 2006 as a prescription medication used to help adults quit smoking. The drug is commonly used for 12 to 24 weeks.
 There is no immediate risk to patients currently taking Chantix, according to a company statement posted on the FDA website. However, patients taking the medication should consult with their health care provider to determine if alternative treatments are available.
 The affected lots were sent to distributors and wholesalers nationwide from May 2019 to September 2021.
 According to the FDA, N-Nitroso-varenicline is in the nitrosamine class of compounds, some of which are considered probably human carcinogens (substances that could cause cancer), based on laboratory tests.
 "Pfizer is undertaking this precautionary measure," the company said in its statement. "Long-term ingestion of N-nitroso-varenicline may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans."
 According to Pfizer, patients with Chantix Tablets should contact Stericycle Inc. at 888-276-6166 (Mon.-Fri. 8:00 am - 5:00 pm ET) for return and reimbursement information.
 Load-Date: September 18, 2021

 

End of Document


Cancer concerns lead to 'precautionary' recall of anti-smoking drug
FOX - 4 WDAF (Kansas City, Missouri)
September 17, 2021 Friday

 Copyright 2021 Local TV LLC
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 277 words
Byline: Nexstar Media Wire
Body




(WTAJ) — A popular drug to curb smoking habits is being recalled over consumer safety concerns.
Pfizer has announced a voluntary recall of all batches of Chantix 0.5 mg and 1 mg tablets due to the presence of an amount of nitrosamine above the Food and Drug Administration's acceptable limit.
 The recall comes two months after Pfizer paused the distribution of the drug in July and pulled nine lots from production and shelves. Pfizer has notified wholesalers and distributors with an existing inventory to stop distribution and production immediately.
 Chantix was approved by the FDA in 2006 as a prescription medication used to help adults quit smoking. The drug is commonly used for 12 to 24 weeks.
 There is no immediate risk to patients currently taking Chantix, according to a company statement posted on the FDA website. However, patients taking the medication should consult with their health care provider to determine if alternative treatments are available.
 The affected lots were sent to distributors and wholesalers nationwide from May 2019 to September 2021.
 According to the FDA, N-Nitroso-varenicline is in the nitrosamine class of compounds, some of which are considered probably human carcinogens (substances that could cause cancer), based on laboratory tests.
 "Pfizer is undertaking this precautionary measure," the company said in its statement. "Long-term ingestion of N-nitroso-varenicline may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans."
 According to Pfizer, patients with Chantix Tablets should contact Stericycle Inc. at 888-276-6166 (Mon.-Fri. 8:00 am – 5:00 pm ET) for return and reimbursement information.
 Graphic



 
In this June 11, 2009 file photo, a customer at the Red Key Taven in Indianapolis lights a cigarette. (AP Photo/Darron Cummings, file)
 Load-Date: September 18, 2021

 

End of Document


Pfizer Further Expands Recall Of Anti-smoking Drug Chantix
CE Noticias Financieras English
September 17, 2021 Friday

 Copyright 2021 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2021 CE Noticias Financieras All Rights Reserved
Length: 421 words
Body




       Drug major Pfizer has again expanded the earlier two recalls of its anti-smoking Drug Chantix (Varenicline) in the form of tablets, to now include all the lots, for the potential presence of nitrosamine impurity, N-Nitroso-varenicline, at or above the FDA interim acceptable intake limit (ADI), the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or FDA said in a statement.
 In July, Pfizer had initially recalled two lots of Chantix 0.5mg tablets, two lots of Chantix 1 mg tablets, and eight lots of a Chantix kit of 0.5mg/1 mg tablets for the similar nitrosamine impurity issue. Later in August, it expanded the recall to include additional four lots of Chantix kit 0.5mg/1 mg tablets.
 The current recall involves all (156) lots of Chantix 0.5 mg and 1 mg tablets. Pfizer said it is undertaking this precautionary measure as alternative suppliers have been approved in the U.S.
 The agency noted that though there is no immediate risk to patients taking this medication, but long-term ingestion of N-nitroso-varenicline may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans.
 The health benefits of stopping smoking outweigh the theoretical potential cancer risk from the nitrosamine impurity in varenicline, it added.
 The company is yet to receive any reports of adverse events assessed to be related to this recall.
 Chantix is indicated to help patients quit smoking and is intended for short term use. The drug has a safety profile that has been established over 15 years of marketing authorization and through a robust clinical program.
 The affected products are packed in bottles of 56 tablets and cartons containing 4 blister packs of 14 tablets each as well as cartons containing one blister pack of 11 0.5 mg tablets and one blister pack containing 42 1 mg tablets.
 T*hey were distributed to wholesalers and distributors across the U.S., US Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico from May 2019 to September 2021. The expiration dates range from August 2021 to December 2023.
 The company has urged patients currently taking Chantix to consult with their healthcare provider about alternative treatment options. It has also asked wholesalers and distributors with an existing inventory of Chantix tablets to stop use and distribution and quarantine the product immediately.
 Nitrosamine, a known environmental contaminant, is classified as a probable human carcinogen that could cause cancer. This is generally found in water and foods, including cured and grilled meats, dairy products, and vegetables.        
 Load-Date: September 18, 2021

 

End of Document


Cancer concerns lead to 'precautionary' recall of anti-smoking drug
FOX - 8 WGHP (High Point, Greensboro, Winston-Salem, North Carolina)
September 17, 2021 Friday

 Copyright 2021 Local TV LLC
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS
Length: 277 words
Byline: Kaitlyn Hall
Body




(WTAJ) — A popular drug to curb smoking habits is being recalled over consumer safety concerns.
Pfizer has announced a voluntary recall of all batches of Chantix 0.5 mg and 1 mg tablets due to the presence of an amount of nitrosamine above the Food and Drug Administration's acceptable limit.
 The recall comes two months after Pfizer paused the distribution of the drug in July and pulled nine lots from production and shelves. Pfizer has notified wholesalers and distributors with an existing inventory to stop distribution and production immediately.
 Chantix was approved by the FDA in 2006 as a prescription medication used to help adults quit smoking. The drug is commonly used for 12 to 24 weeks.
 There is no immediate risk to patients currently taking Chantix, according to a company statement posted on the FDA website. However, patients taking the medication should consult with their health care provider to determine if alternative treatments are available.
 The affected lots were sent to distributors and wholesalers nationwide from May 2019 to September 2021.
 According to the FDA, N-Nitroso-varenicline is in the nitrosamine class of compounds, some of which are considered probably human carcinogens (substances that could cause cancer), based on laboratory tests.
 "Pfizer is undertaking this precautionary measure," the company said in its statement. "Long-term ingestion of N-nitroso-varenicline may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans."
 According to Pfizer, patients with Chantix Tablets should contact Stericycle Inc. at 888-276-6166 (Mon.-Fri. 8:00 am - 5:00 pm ET) for return and reimbursement information.
 Load-Date: September 19, 2021

 

End of Document


Cancer concerns lead to 'precautionary' recall of anti-smoking drug
CBS - 3 WRBL (Columbus, GA)
September 17, 2021 Friday

 Copyright 2021 Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc.
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: HEALTH
Length: 277 words
Byline: Kaitlyn Hall
Body




(WTAJ) — A popular drug to curb smoking habits is being recalled over consumer safety concerns.
Pfizer has announced a voluntary recall of all batches of Chantix 0.5 mg and 1 mg tablets due to the presence of an amount of nitrosamine above the Food and Drug Administration's acceptable limit.
 The recall comes two months after Pfizer paused the distribution of the drug in July and pulled nine lots from production and shelves. Pfizer has notified wholesalers and distributors with an existing inventory to stop distribution and production immediately.
 Chantix was approved by the FDA in 2006 as a prescription medication used to help adults quit smoking. The drug is commonly used for 12 to 24 weeks.
 There is no immediate risk to patients currently taking Chantix, according to a company statement posted on the FDA website. However, patients taking the medication should consult with their health care provider to determine if alternative treatments are available.
 The affected lots were sent to distributors and wholesalers nationwide from May 2019 to September 2021.
 According to the FDA, N-Nitroso-varenicline is in the nitrosamine class of compounds, some of which are considered probably human carcinogens (substances that could cause cancer), based on laboratory tests.
 "Pfizer is undertaking this precautionary measure," the company said in its statement. "Long-term ingestion of N-nitroso-varenicline may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans."
 According to Pfizer, patients with Chantix Tablets should contact Stericycle Inc. at 888-276-6166 (Mon.-Fri. 8:00 am – 5:00 pm ET) for return and reimbursement information.
 Load-Date: September 18, 2021

 

End of Document


DeLauro Reiterates Call to Ban Ranitidine Sales, Reintroduces Bill to Giving FDA Mandatory Recall Authority Over Drugs; Rep. Rosa L. DeLauro (D-CT) News Release
Congressional Documents and Publications
January 10, 2020

 Copyright 2020 Federal Information and News Dispatch, Inc.
Section: U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES DOCUMENTS
Length: 462 words
Body




WASHINGTON, DC -- (January 10, 2020) At a news conference today in the Capitol with medical experts, Congresswoman Rosa DeLauro (CT-03) reiterated her call to ban sales of ranitidine--the active ingredient in Zantac--and reintroduced the Recall Unsafe Drugs Act. Her legislation would give the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) mandatory recall authority over drugs and homeopathic products.
Joining her at today's news conference were:
* David Light, Founder and CEO of Valisure;
* Joe Graedon, Pharmacologist and Co-Host of The People's Pharmacy on NPR; and
* Dr. Jon Ernstoff, Gastroenterologist at MidState Medical Center in Connecticut
"The FDA's mission is to protect public health by assuring drugs, medical devices, and our nation's food supply are safe. Yet, every day, drugs and homeopathic products with significant evidence of safety concerns remain available to consumers across the country. That is unacceptable," said Congresswoman DeLauro. "The Recall Unsafe Drugs Act would enable the FDA to step in and issue a mandatory recall of products that have been found to cause serious health consequences or death. As Valisure and its research partners have found in their research, this problem extends to popular drugs like Zantac. People deserve to know that the medication they are using is safe. As a regulatory agency, the FDA needs to thoroughly review the safety of drugs before they come to market and while they are on the market. Anything short of that is a failure that puts lives at risk."
Late last year, DeLauro wrote a letter to (FDA) Commissioner Stephen Hahn and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Secretary Alex Azar to recall drugs containing ranitidine due to high levels of N-Nitrososdimethylamine ("NDMA"), a probable human carcinogen. A signed copy of the letter can be found here https://delauro.house.gov/sites/delauro.house.gov/files/DeLauro_Letter_FDA_HHS_Ranitidine.pdf.
Currently, the FDA has mandatory recall authority over other products that the agency regulates, such as medical devices, food, and biological products. Unfortunately, when something goes wrong with drugs, the FDA has to rely on the good faith of drug manufactures to recall their products. More often than not, drug manufacturers heed the warnings of the FDA when products are causing harm. However, there are times when manufacturers refuse to recall their products, even in the face of overwhelming evidence suggesting that they are causing illness or even death to consumers. DeLauro's legislation would close this loophole and enable the FDA to step in and issue a mandatory recall.
Read this original document at: https://delauro.house.gov/media-center/press-releases/delauro-reiterates-call-ban-ranitidine-sales-reintroduces-bill-giving
 Load-Date: January 11, 2020

 

End of Document


Pfizer recalling popular stop-smoking drug Chantix over impurities
CBS - 12 WJTV (Jackson, Mississippi)
July 19, 2021 Monday

 Copyright 2021 Media General Communications Holdings, LLC
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: LIVING LOCAL
Length: 692 words
Byline: Jocelina Joiner, NEXSTAR MEDIA WIRE
Body




Chantix (Credit: FDA)
(NEXSTAR) — Pfizer is voluntarily recalling the anti-smoking drug Chantix, a brand of varenicline, due to impurities that exceed approved levels, the Food and Drug Administration has announced.
 The recall includes two lots of Chantix 0.5 mg tablets, two lots of Chantix 1 mg tablets, and eight lots of a Chantix kit of 0.5mg/1 mg tablets that may have too much nitrosamine, N-nitroso-varenicline, based on the Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI) level established by Pfizer.
 "N-Nitroso-varenicline belongs to the nitrosamine class of compounds, some of which are classified as probable or possible human carcinogens (substances that could cause cancer), based on laboratory tests such as rodent carcinogenicity studies," the FDA has said.
 The FDA says there is no immediate risk to patients taking this medication, though long-term use "may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans." However, the FDA says the health benefits of quitting smoking outweigh the cancer risk from the impurity in varenicline.
 Chantix helps smokers quit and is intended for short-term use. According to the FDA, cigarette smokers are 15 to 30 times more likely to get lung cancer than non-smokers.
 The FDA said everyone is exposed to some level of nitrosamines, which are common in water and foods, including cured and grilled meats, dairy products and vegetables.
 "These impurities may increase the risk of cancer if people are exposed to them above acceptable levels over long periods of time," the FDA said.
 People taking Chantix should check with their doctor about whether they received an affected lot, and if appropriate, about alternative treatments. Pfizer has received no reports of "adverse events" related to this recall.
 The FDA provided the following table that includes the national drug code (NDC), lot number, expiration date, and configuration details for Chantix tablets. The product lots were distributed across the U.S. and Puerto Rico from June 2019 to June 2021.
 Product  NDC  Lot   ExpDate  Presentation  Config/Count
 Chantix
 (varenicline)
 Tablets, 0.5 mg 0069-0468-56 00019213 2022 JAN Bottles 56 tablets/bottle
 Chantix
 (varenicline)
 Tablets, 0.5 mg 0069-0468-56 EC6994 2023 MAY Bottles 56 tablets/bottle
 Chantix
 (varenicline)
 Tablets, 1 mg 0069-0469-56 EA6080 2023 MAR Bottles 56 tablets/bottle
 Chantix
 (varenicline)
 Tablets, 1 mg 0069-0469-56 EC9843 2023 MAR Bottles 56 tablets/bottle
 Chantix
 (varenicline)
 Tablets, 0.5/1 mg 0069-0471-03 00020231 2021 SEP Cartons containing 2 blister packs Carton containing one blister pack of 11 0.5 mg tablets and one blister pack containing 42 1 mg tablets
 Chantix
 (varenicline)
 Tablets, 0.5/1 mg 0069-0471-03 00020232 2021 NOV Cartons containing 2 blister packs Carton containing one blister pack of 11 0.5 mg tablets and one blister pack containing 42 1 mg tablets
 Chantix
 (varenicline)
 Tablets, 0.5/1 mg 0069-0471-03 00020357 2021 DEC Cartons containing 2 blister packs Carton containing one blister pack of 11 0.5 mg tablets and one blister pack containing 42 1 mg tablets
 Chantix
 (varenicline)
 Tablets, 0.5/1 mg 0069-0471-03 00020358 2022 JAN Cartons containing 2 blister packs Carton containing one blister pack of 11 0.5 mg tablets and one blister pack containing 42 1 mg tablets
 Chantix
 (varenicline)
 Tablets, 0.5/1 mg 0069-0471-03 00020716 2022 JAN Cartons containing 2 blister packs Carton containing one blister pack of 11 0.5 mg tablets and one blister pack containing 42 1 mg tablets
 Chantix
 (varenicline)
 Tablets, 0.5/1 mg 0069-0471-03 ET1600 01/2023 Cartons containing 2 blister packs Carton containing one blister pack of 11 0.5 mg tablets and one blister pack containing 42 1 mg tablets
 Chantix
 (varenicline)
 Tablets, 0.5/1 mg 0069-0471-03 ET1607 01/2023 Cartons containing 2 blister packs Carton containing one blister pack of 11 0.5 mg tablets and one blister pack containing 42 1 mg tablets
 Chantix
 (varenicline)
 Tablets, 0.5/1 mg 0069-0471-03 ET1609 01/2023 Cartons containing 2 blister packs Carton containing one blister pack of 11 0.5 mg tablets and one blister pack containing 42 1 mg tablets
 For more information, go to the FDA website.
 Graphic



 
Chantix (Credit: FDA)
 Load-Date: July 20, 2021

 

End of Document


Pfizer Further Expands Recall Of Anti-smoking Drug Chantix
RTT News (United States)
September 17, 2021 Friday

 Copyright 2021 Content Engine, LLC.
All Rights Reserved
Copyright 2021 RTT News All Rights Reserved
Length: 421 words
Byline: editorial@rttnews.com,  (RTT Staff Writer)
Body




       Drug major Pfizer has again expanded the earlier two recalls of its anti-smoking Drug Chantix (Varenicline) in the form of tablets, to now include all the lots, for the potential presence of nitrosamine impurity, N-Nitroso-varenicline, at or above the FDA interim acceptable intake limit (ADI), the U.S. Food and Drug Administration or FDA said in a statement.
 In July, Pfizer had initially recalled two lots of Chantix 0.5mg tablets, two lots of Chantix 1 mg tablets, and eight lots of a Chantix kit of 0.5mg/1 mg tablets for the similar nitrosamine impurity issue. Later in August, it expanded the recall to include additional four lots of Chantix kit 0.5mg/1 mg tablets.
 The current recall involves all (156) lots of Chantix 0.5 mg and 1 mg tablets. Pfizer said it is undertaking this precautionary measure as alternative suppliers have been approved in the U.S.
 The agency noted that though there is no immediate risk to patients taking this medication, but long-term ingestion of N-nitroso-varenicline may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans.
 The health benefits of stopping smoking outweigh the theoretical potential cancer risk from the nitrosamine impurity in varenicline, it added.
 The company is yet to receive any reports of adverse events assessed to be related to this recall.
 Chantix is indicated to help patients quit smoking and is intended for short term use. The drug has a safety profile that has been established over 15 years of marketing authorization and through a robust clinical program.
 The affected products are packed in bottles of 56 tablets and cartons containing 4 blister packs of 14 tablets each as well as cartons containing one blister pack of 11 0.5 mg tablets and one blister pack containing 42 1 mg tablets.
 T*hey were distributed to wholesalers and distributors across the U.S., US Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico from May 2019 to September 2021. The expiration dates range from August 2021 to December 2023.
 The company has urged patients currently taking Chantix to consult with their healthcare provider about alternative treatment options. It has also asked wholesalers and distributors with an existing inventory of Chantix tablets to stop use and distribution and quarantine the product immediately.
 Nitrosamine, a known environmental contaminant, is classified as a probable human carcinogen that could cause cancer. This is generally found in water and foods, including cured and grilled meats, dairy products, and vegetables.        
 Load-Date: September 18, 2021

 

End of Document


Pfizer recalling popular stop-smoking drug Chantix over impurities
CBS - 3 WRBL (Columbus, GA)
July 19, 2021 Monday

 Copyright 2021 Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc.
Distributed by Newsbank, Inc. All Rights Reserved
Section: HEALTH
Length: 692 words
Byline: Jocelina Joiner
Body




Chantix (Credit: FDA)
(NEXSTAR) — Pfizer is voluntarily recalling the anti-smoking drug Chantix, a brand of varenicline, due to impurities that exceed approved levels, the Food and Drug Administration has announced.
 The recall includes two lots of Chantix 0.5 mg tablets, two lots of Chantix 1 mg tablets, and eight lots of a Chantix kit of 0.5mg/1 mg tablets that may have too much nitrosamine, N-nitroso-varenicline, based on the Acceptable Daily Intake (ADI) level established by Pfizer.
 "N-Nitroso-varenicline belongs to the nitrosamine class of compounds, some of which are classified as probable or possible human carcinogens (substances that could cause cancer), based on laboratory tests such as rodent carcinogenicity studies," the FDA has said.
 The FDA says there is no immediate risk to patients taking this medication, though long-term use "may be associated with a theoretical potential increased cancer risk in humans." However, the FDA says the health benefits of quitting smoking outweigh the cancer risk from the impurity in varenicline.
 Chantix helps smokers quit and is intended for short-term use. According to the FDA, cigarette smokers are 15 to 30 times more likely to get lung cancer than non-smokers.
 The FDA said everyone is exposed to some level of nitrosamines, which are common in water and foods, including cured and grilled meats, dairy products and vegetables.
 "These impurities may increase the risk of cancer if people are exposed to them above acceptable levels over long periods of time," the FDA said.
 People taking Chantix should check with their doctor about whether they received an affected lot, and if appropriate, about alternative treatments. Pfizer has received no reports of "adverse events" related to this recall.
 The FDA provided the following table that includes the national drug code (NDC), lot number, expiration date, and configuration details for Chantix tablets. The product lots were distributed across the U.S. and Puerto Rico from June 2019 to June 2021.
 Product  NDC  Lot   ExpDate  Presentation  Config/Count
 Chantix
 (varenicline)
 Tablets, 0.5 mg 0069-0468-56 00019213 2022 JAN Bottles 56 tablets/bottle
 Chantix
 (varenicline)
 Tablets, 0.5 mg 0069-0468-56 EC6994 2023 MAY Bottles 56 tablets/bottle
 Chantix
 (varenicline)
 Tablets, 1 mg 0069-0469-56 EA6080 2023 MAR Bottles 56 tablets/bottle
 Chantix
 (varenicline)
 Tablets, 1 mg 0069-0469-56 EC9843 2023 MAR Bottles 56 tablets/bottle
 Chantix
 (varenicline)
 Tablets, 0.5/1 mg 0069-0471-03 00020231 2021 SEP Cartons containing 2 blister packs Carton containing one blister pack of 11 0.5 mg tablets and one blister pack containing 42 1 mg tablets
 Chantix
 (varenicline)
 Tablets, 0.5/1 mg 0069-0471-03 00020232 2021 NOV Cartons containing 2 blister packs Carton containing one blister pack of 11 0.5 mg tablets and one blister pack containing 42 1 mg tablets
 Chantix
 (varenicline)
 Tablets, 0.5/1 mg 0069-0471-03 00020357 2021 DEC Cartons containing 2 blister packs Carton containing one blister pack of 11 0.5 mg tablets and one blister pack containing 42 1 mg tablets
 Chantix
 (varenicline)
 Tablets, 0.5/1 mg 0069-0471-03 00020358 2022 JAN Cartons containing 2 blister packs Carton containing one blister pack of 11 0.5 mg tablets and one blister pack containing 42 1 mg tablets
 Chantix
 (varenicline)
 Tablets, 0.5/1 mg 0069-0471-03 00020716 2022 JAN Cartons containing 2 blister packs Carton containing one blister pack of 11 0.5 mg tablets and one blister pack containing 42 1 mg tablets
 Chantix
 (varenicline)
 Tablets, 0.5/1 mg 0069-0471-03 ET1600 01/2023 Cartons containing 2 blister packs Carton containing one blister pack of 11 0.5 mg tablets and one blister pack containing 42 1 mg tablets
 Chantix
 (varenicline)
 Tablets, 0.5/1 mg 0069-0471-03 ET1607 01/2023 Cartons containing 2 blister packs Carton containing one blister pack of 11 0.5 mg tablets and one blister pack containing 42 1 mg tablets
 Chantix
 (varenicline)
 Tablets, 0.5/1 mg 0069-0471-03 ET1609 01/2023 Cartons containing 2 blister packs Carton containing one blister pack of 11 0.5 mg tablets and one blister pack containing 42 1 mg tablets
 For more information, go to the FDA website.
 Load-Date: July 20, 2021

 

End of Document
